J Econ Inequal (2011) 9:289–314
DOI 10.1007/s10888-011-9181-4

Understandings and misunderstandings
of multidimensional poverty measurement
Sabina Alkire · James Foster

Received: 1 March 2011 / Accepted: 20 April 2011 / Published online: 18 June 2011
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011

Abstract Multidimensional measures provide an alternative lens through which
poverty may be viewed and understood. In recent work we have attempted to
offer a practical approach to identifying the poor and measuring aggregate poverty
(Alkire and Foster, J Public Econ, 2011). As this is quite a departure from traditional
unidimensional and multidimensional poverty measurement—particularly with respect to the identification step—further elaboration may be warranted. In this paper
we elucidate the strengths, limitations, and misunderstandings of multidimensional
poverty measurement in order to clarify the debate and catalyse further research. We
begin with general definitions of unidimensional and multidimensional methodologies for measuring poverty. We provide an intuitive description of our measurement
approach, including a ‘dual cutoff’ identification step that views poverty as the state
of being multiply deprived, and an aggregation step based on the traditional FGT
measures. We briefly discuss five characteristics of our methodology that are easily
overlooked or mistaken and conclude with some brief remarks on the way forward.
Keywords Poverty measurement · Multidimensional poverty · Deprivation ·
FGT measures · Decomposability · Joint distribution · Axiom
JEL Classification I3 · I32 · D63 · O1

S. Alkire (B) · J. Foster
Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative,
Oxford Department of International Development,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
e-mail: sabina.alkire@qeh.ox.ac.uk
J. Foster
The Institute for International Economic Policy,
The Elliott School, The George Washington University,
Washington, DC, USA

290

S. Alkire, J. Foster

[T]he job of a “measure” or an “index” is to distill what is particularly relevant
for our purpose, and then to focus specifically on that.... The central issues in
devising an index relate to systematic assessment of importance. Measurement
has to be integrated with evaluation. This is not an easy task.
Amartya Sen [43]

1 Introduction
How we measure poverty can importantly influence how we come to understand
it, how we analyze it, and how we create policies to influence it. For this reason,
measurement methodologies can be of tremendous practical relevance.
In 2003, two signal articles were published in this Journal. One, by François
Bourguignon and Satya Chakravarty [20], proposed a class of multidimensional
poverty measures that extended the Foster Greer and Thorbecke (FGT) class
of indices and discussed interrelationships among dimensions [31]. Another, by
Anthony Atkinson [17], linked the emerging axiomatic literature on multidimensional poverty measures to the “counting” literature that had been implemented
in Europe and urged that counting measures be connected more with welfare economics. In recent years, the literature on multidimensional poverty measurement has
blossomed in a number of different directions. The 1997 Human Development Report
[48] and the 2000/1 World Development Report [50] vividly introduced poverty as a
multidimensional phenomenon, and the Millennium Declaration and MDGs have
highlighted multiple dimensions of poverty since 2000. In the academic literature,
new measurement methodologies are being created.1 Interest in multidimensional
poverty measurement is growing.
In a time of considerable creative ferment, it can be helpful to clarify the
potentials of different measurement methodologies, and to distinguish misunderstandings from limitations. This paper does so for a multidimensional methodology
we first developed in 2007 and which has been implemented at the national and
international levels. A practical aim of Alkire and Foster [4, 7] was to construct
poverty measurement methods that could be used with discrete and qualitative data
(for example, functionings like literacy or physical security) as well as continuous and
cardinal data (as income and consumption are commonly viewed). A theoretical aim
was to re-examine the identification step (addressing the question ‘who is poor?’),
which poses a much greater challenge when there are multiple dimensions. The result
is a methodology for measuring poverty in the sense of Sen [41] that first identifies
who is poor, then aggregates to obtain overall measures of poverty that reflect the
multiple deprivations experienced by the poor.
Our methodology is perhaps best seen as a general framework for measuring
multidimensional poverty since many key decisions are left to the user. These include
the selection of dimensions, dimensional cutoffs (to determine when a person is

1 The literature is growing rapidly; some key papers in the axiomatic tradition include Anand and Sen

[12], Brandolini and D’Alessio [21], Chakravarty et al. [24], Tsui [47], Atkinson [17], Bourguignon
and Chakravarty [20], Deutsch and Silber [26], Duclos et al. [27], Chakravarty and D’Ambrosio
[22], Kakwani and Silber [34, 35] and Thorbecke [46]. For recent critiques of multidimensional
measurement, see Ravallion [38, 39].

Understandings and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty

291

deprived in a dimension), dimensional weights (to indicate the relative importance
of the different deprivations), and a poverty cutoff (to determine when a person
has enough deprivations to be considered to be poor).2 We note that this flexibility
makes it particularly useful for measurement efforts at the country level where
these decisions can fit the purpose of the measure and can embody normative
judgements regarding what it means to be poor. The method delivers an aggregate
poverty measure that reflects the prevalence of poverty and the joint distribution of
deprivations. Useful partial indices are reported that reveal the intuition and layers
of information embedded in the summary measure. For example, our most basic
index is the product of two partial indices that measure prevalence and intensity. The
overall measure can be additively decomposed by population subgroups and (after
the poor have been identified) by dimension. The methodology satisfies a set of basic
axioms for multidimensional poverty measurement.
The reason to delineate clearly the value-added of any new set of tools—such
as this methodology—is twofold. First, if the value-added is well understood, and
if misunderstandings are clarified, then researchers may be able to sharpen the
contributions of the new technique by developing complementary methodologies, by
improving applications, or by tackling standing questions. Second, a clear articulation
of potential applications can enable others to mine the new tools for their full range
of empirical insights.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents unidimensional approaches to
poverty measurement while Section 3 describes multidimensional methods. Section 4
provides an intuitive description of our measurement approach and the insights that
it generates. Section 5 discusses five characteristics of our methodology that are easily
overlooked or mistaken, while Section 6 concludes with some brief remarks on the
way forward.

2 Unidimensional methods
In his seminal 1976 paper “Poverty: An Ordinal Approach to Measurement,”
Amartya Sen described two main steps that poverty measurement must address:
1. identifying the poor among the total population, and
2. constructing a numerical measure of poverty.
Sen’s two-step procedure of identification and aggregation has become the standard
conceptual framework for poverty measurement, and we follow his approach in our
discussion of unidimensional and multidimensional methods.
Unidimensional methods can be applied when a well-defined single-dimensional
resource variable, such as income, has been selected as the basis for poverty evaluation. This variable is typically assumed to be cardinal; however, in some cases
the variable may only have ordinal significance (i.e., the direction of change is
discernable, but not its magnitude). Identification in the unidimensional environment
typically proceeds by setting a poverty line corresponding to a minimum level below

2 The

preliminary step of selecting dimensional variables is closely linked to the selection of
dimensional weights. For example, choosing one out of several possible variables is tantamount to
assigning that dimension full weight and the remaining dimensions zero weight.

292

S. Alkire, J. Foster

which one is considered poor. Aggregation is usually achieved through the use
of a numerical poverty measure that determines the overall level of poverty in a
distribution given the poverty line.
To facilitate our discussion, we begin with three examples of unidimensional
poverty measures drawn from the FGT class. Consider the following vectors constructed from the distribution y of a given resource (say income) and a poverty
line z. The deprivation vector g0 replaces each income below the poverty line with
1 and replaces nonpoor incomes with 0. The normalized gap vector g1 replaces each
poor income yi with the normalized gap (z − yi )/z and assigns 0 to the rest. The
squared gap vector g2 replaces each poor income yi with the squared normalized gap
[(z − yi )/z]2 and assigns 0 to the rest. Each of these vectors is censored in that every
nonpoor person is assigned a value of 0.
The headcount ratio is simply P0 = μ(g0 ), or the mean of the deprivation vector; it
indicates the prevalence of poverty. The poverty gap measure is P1 = μ(g1 ); it measures the average depth of poverty across the society as a whole. The squared gap,
or distribution sensitive FGT, measure is P2 = μ(g2 ); it emphasizes the conditions
of the poorest of the poor. All three can be applied to cardinal variables; only the
headcount ratio can also be used with an ordinal variable. The measures satisfy an
array of axioms, including a subgroup decomposability property that views overall
poverty as a population share weighted average of subgroup poverty levels. The
headcount ratio violates an intuitive monotonicity axiom (if a poor person’s resource
level falls, poverty should rise); the poverty gap measure satisfies monotonicity, but
not the transfer principle (poverty should fall if two poor resource levels are brought
closer together by a progressive transfer between them); the final FGT index satisfies
monotonicity and the transfer principle.
Unidimensional methods require a single dimensional variable and a single cutoff,
but place no a priori restrictions on how the resource variable has been constructed.
It could be a single resource variable, such as income, added up across all sources.
It could be total expenditure added up across different categories reported in
an expenditure survey, or perhaps drawn from consumption surveys that require
respondents to recall quantities and prices. Of course, the interpretation of the
variable and its cutoff level is very different if total income or total expenditure
is used, with the former reflecting “what could be” and the latter reflecting “what
is” [16]. However, the underlying principle of aggregation is the same: adding up
monetary values to obtain a total resource level that can be compared to a monetary
cutoff.3
Unidimensional tools might also be applied to other aggregate variables, such
as those obtained by combining fundamentally distinct components that are not
measured in the same units and may have no natural or observable means of
conversion into a common variable. One method is to use a composite indicator,
which aggregates across several component variables by multiplying each by a
factor and adding up; another example might be a utility function that aggregates
components in a nonlinear fashion. However, there are several challenges with such

3 These

methods may also be used with non-aggregated cardinal variables (such as years of schooling), ordinal variables (such as self-reported health) and categorical variables (such as modes of
access to drinking water), although the latter two categories will restrict the poverty measures that
can be used.

Understandings and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty

293

a strategy. The entire enterprise depends on the validity of the aggregate variable in
representing the actual resources or achievements of people and the actual tradeoffs
among component variables, and yet evidence in this regard may be sparse, lending
little guidance to the selection of weights or of a proper functional form. One or
more components may be only ordinally meaningful, which rules out the usual forms
of aggregation across component variables (since every cardinal representation is
admissible for an ordinal variable). Or the components may well represent distinct
resources and categories of needs, which cannot be merged or freely traded for
one another. Applying unidimensional methods to an aggregate composite indicator
suggests that the presence or the extent of shortfalls in component variables are
of no particular concern, and thus do not independently affect whether a person is
poor, or the overall level of poverty. For these reasons it may make sense to explore
alternatives that can complement unidimensional methods.

3 Multidimensional methods
Suppose, then, that we have data on achievements in several dimensions, distributed
across a population. Following Sen [41] we ask: who is poor, and how should overall
poverty be measured in this setting?
As noted above, if the underlying concept of poverty admits a natural way of
aggregating the various dimensions into an overall variable, then a unidimensional
methodology can be used. In this approach, the poor are identified on the basis of a
single cutoff, and overall poverty is evaluated using a unidimensional measure such
as a member of the FGT class. The many dimensions are merged into one and viewed
through a unidimensional lens.
What if an aggregate variable cannot be plausibly constructed, and instead there
are several important distinct dimensions? How should we identify the poor and
measure poverty in this case? Bourguignon and Chakravarty [20] propose the use of
dimension-specific lines—which are called deprivation cutof fs in Alkire and Foster
[4]—as the basis for determining who is deprived and in which dimension. They
then posit the existence of an identif ication function, which determines whether a
person is deprived enough to be called poor, and a poverty measure, which evaluates
how much poverty there is overall. Axioms analogous to the ones used in the
unidimensional case ensure that the measure properly reflects poverty, and that it
can be decomposed by subgroup. The axioms also ensure that the poverty measure
is consistent with the identification function.
Much of the research in this area has been concerned with finding an appropriate poverty measure, rather than devising new methods of identifying the poor.
Some measures aggregate across dimensions in a non-linear form. These include
Tsui [47] and Chakravarty and Silber [23] for cardinal measures; Chakravarty and
D’Ambrosio [22] and Bossert et al. [19] for ordinal non-additive measures, and
Rippin [40] for ordinal and cardinal additive measures. Two benchmark identification approaches are discussed by Atkinson [17]: the union and intersection
approaches. Under union identification, a person who is deprived in any dimension is
considered poor; under intersection identification, only persons who are deprived in
all dimensions are considered poor. Both approaches are easy to understand and
have useful characteristics, such as being able to be applied to ordinal variables.

294

S. Alkire, J. Foster

However, they can be particularly ineffective at separating the poor from the
nonpoor. In a recent study by Alkire and Seth [9] that uses ten dimensions to identify
the poor in India, the union approach identifies 97% of the population as poor,
whereas the intersection approach identifies one-tenth of 1%. Such a range of values
is common in many studies.
Bourguignon and Chakravarty’s [20] discussion of identification concerns general
forms of identification functions rather than specific examples, and it is clear from
the context that tradeoffs are being made between continuous dimensional variables.
But this leads the discussion back to the original question of whether a coherent
aggregate variable can be constructed from the individual dimensions. If the answer
is no, as postulated above, then it may be somewhat difficult to justify the aggregation
needed for a general identification function. If yes, then there may be good reason to
explore a unidimensional method.
One important omission in this literature is a proper discussion of the axiomatic
structure for identification functions (or, more generally, for overall methodologies)
that could help guide the construction of new identification techniques. Indeed,
too little attention has been paid to developing practical alternatives to the union,
intersection, and unidimensional identification approaches. This is a key motivation
behind Alkire and Foster [4, 7].
Before moving on to a description of our methodology, we would like to mention
an alternative approach that might be used in this context. Recall that the multidimensional methodologies discussed above draw upon a matrix in which each row
contains the vector of achievement levels associated with a given person and each
column contains the vector of people’s achievement levels in a given dimension.
This general structure allows the measurement method to take advantage of the
information contained in the joint distribution4 of achievements. In contrast, we
can define a restricted type of methodology that applies deprivation cutoffs within
each dimension and ignores all information on links across dimensions. A marginal
method is one that assigns the same level of poverty to any two matrices that generate
the same marginal distributions. For example, consider a method that employs a
union identification approach and aggregates using some increasing function of the
unidimensional headcount ratios (one for each dimension). The resulting poverty
level would surely reflect the prevalence of deprivation in society. However, it would
not be able to say whether the deprivations are spread evenly across the population
or whether they are concentrated in an underclass of multiply deprived persons. We
elaborate on this distinction in Section 5.1.
One useful feature of a marginal method is that it can be estimated using dimensional data from different sources, where the underlying columns of dimensional
achievements are not linked and may even have different population sizes. Indeed,
this approach to measurement can be extended to include cases where the columns
are drawn from dif ferent reference groups within a population, such as children and
adults. The Human Poverty Index developed by Anand and Sen [12] is an example of
this form of extended marginal measure, since it aggregates dimensional deprivation

4 Let w, x, and y be three random variables. The joint distribution gives the percentage of the
population with (w, x, y) or less. The marginal distribution of w gives the percentage of the
population with w or less, and similarly for x and y.

Understandings and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty

295

indicators from different populations (namely, adult illiteracy, the probability at birth
of not surviving until the age of 40, the percentage of households lacking drinking
water, and the percentage of malnourished children according to weight for age).
However, while multiply sourced marginal measures can provide useful estimates of
poverty or aggregate deprivation, they are based on anonymous or unlinked data
and are unable to identify who is multidimensionally poor—a signal benefit of a
measurement methodology based on data linked by person or household.5

4 The AF method
This section provides a systematic overview of the multidimensional methodology
of Alkire and Foster [4, 7]. We describe how poor people are identified using a
“dual cutoff” method. We construct the poverty measures and show how to “drill
down” into each measure to unfold distinctive partial indices that can illuminate
policy questions. Decompositions are exhibited that explain and clarify the aggregate
poverty level. The progression closely mirrors the techniques employed in unidimensional poverty measurement, but with some important differences, most notably in
the identification step. In what follows we will assume that the range of dimensional
variables has been selected and data are available in the form of an (n × d) data
matrix Y for n persons and d ≥ 2 dimensions.
4.1 Identification
In unidimensional analysis, identification is normally accomplished by the use of a
poverty line or threshold, with poor people being identified as those whose resource
or achievement variable level falls below the poverty line. In the multidimensional
measurement setting, where there are multiple variables, identification is a substantially more challenging exercise. This is the part of our methodology that is most
commonly overlooked or misunderstood and so we begin the basic elements of our
dual cutoff identification approach.
Deprivation cutof fs A vector z = (z1 , ..., zd ) of deprivation cutoffs (one for each
dimension) is used to determine whether a person is deprived. If the person’s
achievement level in a given dimension j falls short of the respective deprivation
cutoff z j, the person is said to be deprived in that dimension; if the person’s level is at
least as great as the deprivation cutoff, the person is not deprived in that dimension.
Weights A vector w = (w1 , ..., wd ) of weights or deprivation values is used to
indicate the relative importance of the different deprivations. If each deprivation
is viewed as having equal importance, then this leads to a benchmark case where

5 Note

also that marginal measures could not be part of a multidimensional methodology used to
answer the question “who is poor?” Nor could they be decomposed down to the individual level to
show the joint distribution of deprivations that each person experiences. Once again, this is because
the marginal distributions are not linked by person across dimension. A person who is not deprived
in dimension 1 may well be deprived in dimension 2, but there is no way to determine this.

296

S. Alkire, J. Foster

all the weights are one and sum to the number of dimensions d. If deprivations are
viewed as having differential importance, this is reflected by a vector whose entries
sum to d but can vary from one, with higher weights indicating greater importance.
Note that the deprivation values affect identification as they determine the minimal
combinations of deprivations which will identify a person as being poor; they also
affect aggregation by altering the relative contributions of deprivations to overall
poverty.
Deprivation counts A column vector c = (c1 . . . cn ) of deprivation counts reflects
the breadth of each person’s deprivation. The ith person’s deprivation count ci is the
number of deprivations experienced by i (in the case of equal weights), or the sum of
the values of the deprivations experienced by i (in the general case).
Poverty cutof f A poverty cutoff k satisfying 0 < k ≤ d is used to determine whether
a person has sufficient deprivations to be considered poor. If the ith person’s
deprivation count ci falls below k, the person is not considered to be poor; if the
person’s deprivation count is k or above, the person is identified as being poor. The
title “dual cutoff” refers to the sequential use of deprivation and poverty cutoffs to
identify the poor. Note that when k is less than or equal to the minimum weight across
all dimensions we have union identification. When k = d, the intersection approach
is being used. The deprivation count and poverty cutoff can also be expressed as
percentages of d.
Identif ication function The identification function summarizes the outcome of the
above process and indicates whether a person is poor in Y given deprivation cutoffs
z, weights w, and poverty cutoff k. If the person is poor, the identification function
takes on a value of 1; if the person is not poor, the identification function has a value
of 0.
One of the interesting properties exhibited by our identification approach is that it
is applicable even when one or more of the variables are ordinal. All cardinalizations
of the ordinal variable (found by applying a monotonic transformation to the variable
and its cutoff) yield identical conclusions, regarding whether a person is deprived in
the dimension and whether the person is poor. This expands the potential reach of
the methodology by allowing it to be meaningfully applied to data with lower level
measurement properties.
4.2 Censored matrices
The transition between the identification step and the aggregation step is most easily
understood by examining a progression of matrices. The achievement matrix Y shows
the achievements of n persons in each of d dimensions. The deprivation matrix g0
replaces each entry in Y that is below its respective deprivation cutoff zj with the
deprivation value wj, and each entry that is not below its deprivation cutoff with 0. It
provides a snapshot of who is deprived in which dimension and how much weight the
deprivation carries. The censored deprivation matrix g0 (k) multiplies each row in the
deprivation matrix by the identification function: if the person is poor, then the row

Understandings and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty

297

containing the information of the person is unchanged; but if the person is not poor
the deprivational information of the person is censored and replaced with zeroes. An
example with equal weights is given below for k = 2.
Achievement Matrix
Dimensions

⎡

13.1
⎢ 15.2
⎢
Y=⎣
12.5
20

z=

Deprivation Matrix

⎡

0
⎢0
0
g =⎢
⎣1
0

0
1
1
1

0
0
1
0

⎤
0
1⎥
⎥
1⎦
0

⎡ ⎤
0
⎢2⎥
⎢ ⎥
⎣4⎦
1



13

14
7
10
11

12

4
5
1
3

⎤
1
0⎥
⎥
0⎦
1

3

1

Cutoffs

Censored Deprivation Matrix, k = 2

⎡

0
⎢0
0
g (k) = ⎢
⎣1
0

0
1
1
0

0
0
1
0

⎤
0
1⎥
⎥
1⎦
0

⎡ ⎤
0
⎢2⎥
⎢ ⎥
⎣4⎦
0

The original achievement matrix has three persons that are deprived (see the
underlined entries) in one or more dimensions. The first person (given in the top
row) has no deprivations at all. The next two persons have deprivation counts that
are greater than or equal to k = 2. They are considered to be poor and hence
their entries in the censored deprivation matrix are the same as in the deprivation
matrix. The fourth person has a single deprivation and hence is not poor. This single
deprivation is disregarded in the censored deprivation matrix, which only displays
the deprivations of the poor.6
If the entries of Y are all cardinally significant, then the normalized gap of a person
in a deprived dimension can be defined as the difference between the deprivation
cutoff and the person’s achievement, all divided by the deprivation cutoff. The
normalized gap matrix g1 replaces each deprived entry in Y with the respective
normalized gap multiplied by the deprivation value; it replaces each entry that
is not below its deprivation cutoff with 0. The normalized gap matrix provides a
snapshot of the depth of deprivation of each person in each dimension, weighted
by its relative importance. The squared gap matrix g2 replaces each deprived entry
in Y with the square of the normalized gap multiplied by the deprivation value;
it replaces each entry that is not below its deprivation cutoff with a value of 0.
Squaring the normalized gaps puts relatively more emphasis on larger deprivations.

6 This

example has identical deprivation values across dimensions; the general case admits a wide
variety of identification approaches. For example, if one dimension had overriding importance, and
its deprivation value were set above or equal to k, then any person deprived in that dimension would
be considered to be poor.

298

S. Alkire, J. Foster

The censored normalized gap matrix g1 (k), the censored squared gap matrix g2 (k),
and the censored deprivation counts c(k) are likewise obtained by multiplying
through by the identification function, and hence they only display the information of
the poor.
Censored Normalized Gap Matrix, k = 2;
Normalized gap = (z j − yij )/z j

⎡

0
⎢
0
g1 (k) = ⎢
⎣ 0.04
0

0
0.04
0.17
0

0
0
0.67
0

⎤
0
1 ⎥
⎥
1 ⎦
0

Censored Squared Gap Matrix, k = 2
Squared gap = [(z j − y ij )/z j ]2

⎡

0
⎢
0
g2 (k) = ⎢
⎣ 0.42
0

0
0.422
0.172
0

0
0
0.672
0

⎤
0
12 ⎥
⎥
12 ⎦
0

The censoring step is key to our methodology, since the censored matrices
embody our identification step and are the basic constructs used in the aggregation
step. The original deprivation matrices, by comparison, include information on the
deprivations of the nonpoor, which should not affect any measure that is focused
on the poor. Note that there is one case where this distinction is not relevant: when
the poverty cutoff k becomes small enough (no larger than the smallest deprivation
value) and our identification method becomes the union approach. Any person
who is deprived in any dimension is considered poor and the censored and original
matrices are identical.
4.3 Aggregation
The aggregation step of our methodology builds upon the standard FGT technology,
and likewise generates a parametric class of measures. Each FGT measure can be
viewed as the mean of an appropriate vector built from the original data and censored
using the poverty line, and the AF measures have an analogous structure. We focus
on three main measures corresponding to the key FGT measures.
Adjusted headcount ratio The adjusted headcount ratio is defined as M0 =
μ(g0 (k)), or the mean of the censored deprivation matrix. In our example, the sum of
the entries of g0 (k) is 6 while the number of entries in the matrix is 16, resulting in an
adjusted headcount ratio of 3/8. Since a completely poor and deprived society has 16
deprivations, M0 = 3/8 can be interpreted as the actual number of deprivations (6)
among the poor as a share of the maximum (16).
 
 
Dimensions
c k
c k d
⎡

0
⎢0
0
⎢
g (k) = ⎣
1
0

0
1
1
0

0
0
1
0

⎤
0
1⎥
⎥
1⎦
0

0
2
4
0

2 4
4 4

The headcount H is the proportion of people who are poor, which is two out of
four persons in the above matrix. The intensity A is the average deprivation share
among the poor, which in this example is the average of 2/4 and 4/4, or 3/4. The

Understandings and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty

299

adjusted multidimensional headcount ratio M0 is the product of the headcount times
the intensity (H × A), and is also the mean of the g0 (k) matrix; in this case 3/8.
A second way of viewing M0 is in terms of partial indices—measures that provide
basic information on a single aspect of poverty.7 The first partial index is the
percentage of the population that is poor, or the multidimensional headcount ratio
H. The second is the average intensity A, which calculates the deprivation share for
each poor person by dividing the deprivation count by d, and then averages across
all poor persons. It is easy to see that M0 = HA, which holds in the example since
H = 1/2 and A = 3/4. This breakdown is not unlike the expression P1 = HI for the
unidimensional poverty gap measure, where H is the unidimensional headcount and
I is the so-called income gap ratio, which measures the average depth of poverty
among the poor. M0 can be used with ordinal data: any monotonic transformation of
a dimensional variable and its cutoff leads to the same censored deprivation matrix
and hence the same level of M0 .
Adjusted poverty gap and adjusted FGT If all the variables are cardinally significant,
then information on the depth of deprivations can be used to construct two additional
poverty measures. The adjusted poverty gap measure is defined as M1 = μ(g1 (k)), or
the mean of the censored normalized gap matrix, while the adjusted FGT measure is
M2 = μ(g2 (k)), or the mean of the censored squared gap matrix. Each can likewise
be interpreted using partial indices. Let G denote the average normalized gap, which
calculates the average value of the normalized gap among all instances where a
poor person is deprived (and hence where the censored normalized gap is positive);
similarly, let S denote the average squared gap among all instances where a poor
person is deprived (and hence where the censored squared gap is positive). G
provides information on the average depth of deprivations among all poor and
deprived states; by taking the square of the normalized gaps, S places relatively
greater emphasis on the larger gaps. It can be shown that M1 = HAG and M2 =
HAS, so that each is the product of three intuitive partial indices. In our example,
the sum of the nonzero entries in g1 (k) is (0.04 + 0.42 + 0.17 + 0.67 + 1 + 1) = 3.3
and so M1 = μ(g1 (k)) = 3.3/16; alternatively, H A = 3/8 and G = 3.3/6 yield M1 =
H AG = 3.3/16.
These expressions for the measures suggest a useful line of analysis when applying
the measures to data over time or space. Suppose for example that M0 has increased
over time [14]. It could be useful to know whether the increase was primarily due
to an increase in H, the prevalence of poverty in the population, or to an increase
in A, the average intensity (or breadth) of poverty among the poor. Analogous
breakdowns are available for M1 and M2 , with an additional factor being an increase
in the average depth or average squared gap across deprived states. In conjunction
with our identification approach, the three poverty measures M0 , M1 , and M2 satisfy
an increasingly stringent list of axioms, reflecting M0 ’s sensitivity to intensity or
breadth of deprivation, M1 ’s sensitivity to the depth of a deprivation, and M2 ’s

7 See

for example Foster and Sen [29] or Foster [28].

300

S. Alkire, J. Foster

sensitivity to inequality among deprived states of the poor.8 As we will see below,
each exhibits two forms of decomposition that are especially useful in empirical
applications.
4.4 Decompositions
In developing multidimensional methods, we would not want to lose the useful
properties that the unidimensional methods have employed with such success over
the years. Prime among them is decomposability, which posits that overall poverty
is a population share weighted average of subgroup poverty levels. This requirement
has proved to be of great use in analyzing poverty by regions, by ethnic groups, and
by other subgroups defined in a variety of ways. A related property is subgroup consistency, which requires overall poverty to fall if poverty decreases in one subgroup
and is unchanged in the other subgroups, given fixed subgroup populations. If this
property did not hold, so that overall poverty could rise at the same time its level
falls in subgroups, this could make it difficult indeed to develop appropriate policies
to combat poverty. Both properties are satisfied by the traditional FGT measures
and also by the AF methodology. In the latter case, this follows immediately from
the definition of each measure as the mean of a censored matrix, since the mean is
likewise decomposable across subgroups using population share weights.
The level of poverty in a subgroup may be lower (or higher) than the overall
level of poverty, and this has a direct effect on the overall level as specified by the
decomposition. Indeed, the subgroup poverty level divided by the overall poverty
level, all multiplied by the population share of the subgroup, can be viewed as the
subgroup’s contribution to overall poverty. The subgroup contributions clearly sum
to one.
The measures also exhibit a second form of decomposition—by dimension—
which applies after the identification step when censored matrices have been defined.
For M0 , the breakdown is expressed in terms of each dimension’s censored headcount
ratio, which is the percentage of the overall population who are both poor and
deprived in the given dimension. The dimensional decomposition formula states that
M0 is equal to a weighted average of the censored headcount ratios, where the weight
on dimension j is given by w j/d. The percentage contribution of a given dimension
to overall poverty is its weighted censored headcount ratio divided by the overall
poverty level.9 In the above example, the censored headcount ratio for the first
dimension is 1/4 while the weight is 1/4 so that the contribution of the first dimension
to the overall adjusted headcount ratio M0 is 1/6 = (1/16)/(3/8).

8 The dual-cutoff identification combined with measures M , M , and M yield methodologies that
0
1
2
satisfy decomposability, replication invariance, symmetry, poverty and deprivation focus, weak and
dimensional monotonicity, nontriviality, normalisation, and weak rearrangement; while M1 and M2
satisfy monotonicity; and M2 satisfies a weak transfer property [7]. Our measures are neutral with
respect to a positive rearrangement among the poor, and hence just satisfy a weak rearrangement
property. Bourguignon and Chakravarty [20] have emphasized the possibility of alternative directions and strengths of interaction among deprivations, and provide a method that can convert a
neutral measure into one that reflects varying degrees of substitutability or complementarity.
9 Alternatively,

the weighted censored headcounts are simply the means of the columns of the
censored deprivation matrix. So the decomposition says that M0 is the average of the column means;
while the contribution of a given dimension is its column mean divided by the product of d and M0 .

Understandings and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty

301

We stress that the dimensional decomposition only holds after identification has
taken place. Since our identification function cannot be decomposed by dimension
(one must check across multiple dimensions to see who is poor), the aggregate
poverty level cannot—except in the extreme case of union identification—be reassembled dimension by dimension before identification. This is a fundamental
feature of our approach, which arises because our ‘multiple deprivation’ concept of
poverty is sensitive to the joint distribution of deprivations. In a very interesting paper Chakravarty et al. [24] posit a stronger form of factor decomposition where each
dimensional term depends only on that dimension’s distribution, and show how this
property might be useful in practice. However, a cost of this stronger decomposition
is that the poverty methodology must use a restricted identification approach; the
identification function cannot be sensitive to multiplicities of deprivations or other
information derived from the joint distribution. We discuss this further in Section 5.1
below.
Dimensional decomposition can be used in conjunction with subgroup decomposability to better understand the patterns of poverty across a population and
their differential sources. Alkire and Foster [7] provide an example which first
decomposes a population by ethnic group and then by dimension. They find that
one ethnic group’s contribution to total poverty is much higher for multidimensional
poverty than for income poverty, and then examine how the dimensional contributions vary by ethnic group to see what might lie behind this finding. A second
example drawn from Alkire and Seth [10] provides information on two regions for
one cross-country implementation of M0 called the MPI. The regions have roughly
the same population sizes and share M0 levels of 0.39. Decomposition by dimension
reveals how the underlying structure of deprivations differs across the two for the
10 indicators (see Fig. 1 and Table 1). In Madhya Pradesh, nutritional deprivations
contribute the most to multidimensional poverty, whereas in the Congo the relative

Fig. 1 The percentage contribution of indicators to MPI

Deprivation values
Censored headcount ratio
Contribution (%)
Censored headcount ratio
Contribution (%)

0.56
0.57
8.1
0.52
7.4

0.56
0.73
10.3
0.67
9.5

0.56
0.65
9.2
0.57
8.2

0.56
0.55
7.8
0.31
4.4

0.56
0.62
8.8
0.65
9.3

0.56
0.69
9.8
0.25
3.6

Electr
1.67
0.17
7.2
0.51
21.6

1.67
0.37
15.7
0.31
13.1

Mortal

1.67
0.40
17.1
0.32
13.7

Attend

Education
1.67
0.14
6.1
0.22
9.2

Years
10.00
0.39
100
0.39
100

Overall

Data are drawn from the Demographic and health surveys (DHS) for the DR Congo (2007) and Madhya and Pradesh (2006), which are nationally-representative
household surveys. For details see Alkire and Santos [7].

MP

DRC

Sanita

Nutri

Water

Health
Floor

Assets

Cook

Living standard

Table 1 Decomposition of MPI in Madhya Pradesh (MP) and Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)

302
S. Alkire, J. Foster

Understandings and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty

303

contribution of nutritional deprivations is much less than, say, deprivations in school
attendance. Although the overall poverty levels as measured by M0 are very similar,
decomposition reveals a very different underlying structure of poverty, which in turn
could suggest different policy responses.

5 Misunderstandings
Our methodology is not the last word in multidimensional poverty measurement; we
hope that there will be improvements in both theory and application. To facilitate
this process, we need to be as clear as possible about what our methods, are and
are not, saying. Several aspects of the story are easy to miss or misinterpret, and
these points could benefit from additional emphasis and clarification [3]. In what
follows we present some of these misunderstandings of our approach and of the
whole enterprise of multidimensional poverty measurement.
5.1 The construct: poverty as multiple deprivations
Our methods are based on a concept of poverty as multiple deprivations that are
simultaneously experienced. Persons confronted by a broad range of deprivations
are poor, while those with limited breadth of deprivation may not be. A censoring
process, which limits consideration to the deprivations of the poor, connects our identification and aggregation steps. It follows that our methods are sensitive to the joint
distribution of deprivations, a characteristic that is absent from marginal methods
and suppressed in unidimensional measures applied to an aggregate variable. This
is a key feature of our approach that is most easily seen by contrasting with other
methodologies.
A marginal method reflects population deprivations within dimensions, but does
not look across dimensions for the same person and cannot reflect the extent of
associations among deprivations. Consider the deprivation matrices given below,
and suppose poverty is evaluated using M0 with k = 2. How would conclusions be
different if we used a marginal method? Both matrices depict situations in which, for
each dimension, one fourth of the population is deprived. However, in Matrix 1 it is
the same fourth of the population that is deprived in all dimensions, while in Matrix 2
one fourth is deprived in the first dimension, a second fourth is deprived in the second
dimension, and so on, with no one experiencing more than a single deprivation. Our
methodology focuses on multiple deprivations and readily distinguishes between the
two cases. Indeed, M0 is 1/4 in the first case and zero in the second. A marginal
method would be unable to detect the difference between the two cases given the
limited form of information it admits — the marginal distributions — which are the
same in both cases.
Matrix 1

⎡

0
⎢
0
g0 = ⎢
⎣0
1

0
0
0
1

0
0
0
1

Matrix 2

⎤
⎡ ⎤
⎡
0
0
1
⎢0⎥ 0 ⎢0
0⎥
⎥···⎢ ⎥ g = ⎢
⎣0⎦
⎣0
0⎦
1
1
0

0
1
0
0

0
0
1
0

⎤
⎡ ⎤
1
0
⎢1⎥
0⎥
⎥···⎢ ⎥
⎣1⎦
0⎦
1
4

304

S. Alkire, J. Foster

To illustrate further, recall the dimensional decomposition of M0 as the weighted
average of the censored headcount ratios—where a censored headcount ratio is the
share of the population that is both poor and deprived in a particular dimension.
For Matrix 1, each censored headcount ratio is 1/4 and hence M0 is 1/4; in Matrix
2, no one is poor, and so the censored headcount ratios and M0 are 0. What
would happen if instead we used uncensored headcount ratios (or the share of the
population that is deprived in a dimension) and averaged up to obtain a marginal
measure? The average would account for all deprivations in society, not just those
that are experienced by poor persons. This is not a problem in the first scenario
given above, since all deprivations are experienced by the poor and both forms
of dimensional headcount ratios are 1/4. In the second scenario, though, where
no one is poor the uncensored headcount ratios, and hence the marginal measure,
would remain at 1/4. Depending on the joint distribution, the difference between the
censored and uncensored values may be small (reflecting few deprivations among
nonpoor persons) or large (indicating that many deprivations are scattered among
the nonpoor).10 A marginal measure, by construction, cannot reflect changes in the
joint distribution that leave the marginal distributions unchanged.11
The implications are very different for unidimensional measures applied to an aggregate variable. The key question here centrally concerns the aggregation method,
which collapses all dimensions and their correlations into a single dimension. If the
aggregation method faithfully combines all the relevant resources (or achievements)
into the right aggregate for every person, so that data matrices having the same
aggregate value are in fact identical in all important respects, then a multidimensional
method is not needed. Dimensional cutoffs and deprivations are irrelevant; only the
meaningless variation in the joint distribution is being lost. The difficulty arises when
the aggregate is wrong, or when aggregation is used where aggregation is inappropriate (say, the two dimensions are fundamentally incommensurate achievements).
If aggregation across achievements is seen as crucial to the entire exercise, this may
well drive a careful researcher to focus on dimensions that can be readily aggregated
and omit the rest—no matter how fundamental their link with poverty. A better
alternative might be to aggregate whenever possible and then to analyze the resulting
incommensurate achievements using an appropriate multidimensional methodology.
Our approach seems particularly pertinent when the variables in question relate
to capability deprivations. At a technical level, this is a case where aggregation
of achievements is an inherently challenging exercise, and perhaps inadvisable,
because an achievement above the cutoff in one dimension, like being well educated,

10 The degree of “mismatch” clearly has to do with the degree of positive association among the
dimensions. This is also closely related to the discussion of robustness of results to changes in the
various parameters. See Foster et al. [32, 33].
11 The same logic would apply if uncensored headcount ratios were presented in vector form rather
than averaged. Each dimension would typically include instances of non-poor deprivations; if poverty
was the focus, then the censored headcount ratios would seem to be a more appropriate vector
of dimensional indicators. Put differently, the ministry of health or education would clearly be
interested in censored or uncensored headcount ratios of health or education; the social development
ministry, whose main concern is poverty, would be interested in the censored headcount ratios.

Understandings and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty

305

may not perfectly compensate for a deprivation in another dimension, like being
unemployed. Each capability, and hence each deprivation, has distinct and intrinsic
value. Also, when poor people describe their situation, as has been found repeatedly
in participatory discussions, part of their description often narrates the multiplicity
of disadvantages that batter their lives at once. Malnutrition is coupled with a lack
of work, water has to be fetched from an area with regular violence, or there are
poor services and low incomes. In such cases, part of the experience and problem
of poverty itself is that several deprivations are coupled, experienced together. Our
methodology can reflect the joint distribution of disadvantage and the extent of
simultaneous disadvantages.
5.2 Data requirements: single survey sourcing
Our methodology requires data for each variable to be available from the same
survey and linked at the individual (or household) level.12 It cannot be applied to
anonymous or unlinked data drawn from different sources. In this it is quite similar
to other welfare and empirical analyses at the individual or household level and,
in particular, to traditional unidimensional poverty analyses based on expenditure
surveys, since clearly all expenditures of the household are needed in order to
construct the household’s overall expenditure level. We view this as a positive
attribute of our methodology—that it makes effective use of the data needed to
understand the phenomenon being evaluated.
The pressing need for surveys that supply the data required to investigate the joint
distribution of dimensional achievements was highlighted in the 2009 Commission on
the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress set up by President
Sarkozy and chaired by Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi [45]. That study recommends
that, “surveys should be designed to assess the links between various quality of
life domains for each person, and this information should be used when designing
policies in various fields.” They elaborate this recommendation as follows:
[T]he consequences for quality of life of having multiple disadvantages far
exceed the sum of their individual effects. Developing measures of these
cumulative effects requires information on the “joint distribution” of the
most salient features of quality of life across everyone in a country through
dedicated surveys. Steps in this direction could also be taken by including in
all surveys some standard questions that allow classifying respondents based
on a limited set of characteristics. When designing policies in specific fields,
impacts on indicators pertaining to different quality-of-life dimensions should
be considered jointly, to address the interactions between dimensions and the
needs of people who are disadvantaged in several domains (pp. 15–16).
Data from the same survey are required for all of the measures that reflect the
joint distribution of disadvantage among multidimensionally poor people, regardless
of the particular functional form that the measure might take. Hence an investment

12 There are exceptions to this—for example if data for the same respondent can be merged from
different sources, or if certain variables are uniform across a population subgroup and can be supplied
for subgroups from alternative surveys.

306

S. Alkire, J. Foster

in the data side could be useful in stimulating the development of alternative measurement methodologies. Furthermore, such data are, as the Sarkozy Commission
suggested, required not only for poverty measurement but also for the analysis
of quality of life and welfare. Both welfare and poverty analyses need to reflect
individuals’ experiences.
While our fully multidimensional poverty measures require data from the same
surveys, in a different sense they have far lower data requirements. One of the key
attributes of the AF technology for measuring poverty, and one that is highlighted
in the MPI example discussed below, is that it is consistent with qualitative data that
describe the basic achievements of the poor. The key requirement for ordinal data is
that if the cutoff and variables are changed by a monotonic transformation, the level
of poverty must remain unchanged, and the same people must be identified as poor.
This criterion is satisfied by the dual cutoff identification and the adjusted headcount
ratio M0 . The M0 methodology can also be used with categorical or dichotomous
variables so long as a meaningful deprivation cutoff can be fixed. This is an advantage
not only due to the prevalence of these data, but also because of the fact that data
for some core functionings are not available in cardinal form.
5.3 Methodologies and measures: AF compared with the MPI (and the HDI)
Our methodology is a general framework for multidimensional poverty measurement, which can be filled in different ways. The dimensions and cutoffs could vary,
as could the weights and poverty cutoff. The measure could be applied at different
levels. For example, a poverty measure could be implemented at the village, state, or
national level. And the specific choice of measures might vary: one institution might
implement a measure with cardinal data to reflect the depth of poverty or inequality
among the poor underlying M1 or M2 , whereas another could only have ordinal
data available, and so would report M0 and the breadth of poverty. In sum, our
methodology is a very flexible framework, and can give rise to a number of concrete
applications whose shapes depend upon the purpose for which they are designed.
One notable example of the AF methodology can be found in recent work by
Alkire and Santos [8] on acute multidimensional poverty in developing countries.
The Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) implements M0 for 104 developing
countries using a set of 10 indicators for which internationally comparable data are
available.13 It identifies people as poor depending upon achievements of household
members. It applies cutoffs that are broadly related to international standards such as
the MDGs. Nested weights are applied to the indicators, with the health, education
and living standard categories receiving equal shares of the aggregate weights, and
each indicator being allocated an equal share of the category’s weight. Consequently,
each of the six living standard indicators has a deprivation value of 10/18, while each
of the two health (and the two education) indicators has a deprivation value of 10/6.

13 The MPI was produced collaboratively by OPHI researchers with the UNDP Human Development
Report Office and was included in the 2010 Human Development Report as an experimental index.
See UNDP [49]. Note that in the MPI literature, the term ‘indicator’ corresponds to ‘dimensions’ or
columns in the data matrix, while the term ‘dimension’ is reserved for the three broader categories—
health, education, and standard of living—containing these indicators.

Understandings and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty

307

A poverty cutoff k is chosen that identifies a person as poor if she is deprived in
any two health or education indicators, in all six standard of living indicators, or in
three standard of living and one health or education indicator. Note that the MPI
is one particular application of the AF methodology that was designed for crosscountry purposes. Naturally it reflects the myriad of constraints that are often seen
when constructing internationally comparable measures, yet does create meaningful
comparisons across countries.
The MPI demonstrates the operationality of the AF methodology even in the
presence of rather limited datasets. The aim in implementing the MPI was not
to suggest that this particular set of indicators, dimensions, cutoffs and weights
is appropriate in every application. Rather, it was to apply the AF methodology
fully with respect to one particular problem (cross-country evaluations of acute
poverty based on DHS, MICS, and similar datasets). The existence of a practical
cross country implementation can aid in the development of local, national and
institutional methods that better reflect the particularities of poverty in different
contexts and inform poverty reduction policies.
Because the AF methodology is multidimensional, there is a chance it might
be confused with the Human Development Index (HDI), which aggregates across
achievements in health, education, and standard of living. In fact, the two measure
very different things. The AF methodology (and its particular example of the MPI)
measures poverty: it identifies who is poor and ignores the data of the nonpoor.
In contrast the HDI is a welfare index based on three marginal distributions that
combines the aggregate dimensional achievements of all people (not just the poor)
into one overall score. While the HDI may be limited in terms of data, dimensions,
and methodology, it has helped bring into view people’s achievements in nonmonetary spaces, and made it possible for other categories of multidimensional
measures (such as poverty measures) to be envisioned.
5.4 Underpinnings: poverty and welfare
Our methodology has its roots in the literature on axiomatic poverty measurement
[41], which—like related work in inequality and welfare indices—employs axioms to
discern between measures. Within the axiomatic approach, a method is judged to
be acceptable or unacceptable according to the properties it satisfies. To critique
a method of measurement, one identifies desirable properties it fails to exhibit.
Non-axiomatic arguments, by contrast, are considered less relevant. The axiomatic
approach provides the foundational theoretical structure for the AF methodologies,
and the paper devotes substantial effort to formulating and discussing the axioms
that they satisfy.
There is a clear difference between evaluating the axiomatic characteristics of
a measurement method and questioning the calibrations underlying a particular
implementation of the approach. For example, there may be broad agreement on
the use of the squared gap FGT measure, but disagreement over using income or
consumption as the variable, or about the specific poverty line, or which PPP rates
to use. In the multidimensional case, there may be disagreement over deprivation
values and cutoffs, even if the AF methodology is selected. Any critique that relies
on a specific set of implementation choices is contingent on those choices and may

308

S. Alkire, J. Foster

not reveal much about the general methodology—which is more properly evaluated
in axiomatic terms.14
Another way that poverty measures have been interpreted is through their link
with some concept of welfare. For example, the Watts unidimensional poverty measure is related to the geometric mean—one of Atkinson’s social welfare functions—in
the following way. All incomes above the poverty line are censored to the poverty
line level to create the censored distribution. The geometric mean is applied to the
censored distribution to obtain the censored welfare level. The Watts measure is the
difference between the log of the poverty line and the log of the censored welfare
level. Perhaps an analogous link could be invoked to evaluate the AF methodology
or other multidimensional measures.15
One difficulty in grounding poverty measurement in welfare is that welfare
itself is so challenging to measure in practice. A welfare function must be able to
make meaningful evaluations at all levels of achievements across all persons. This
requires strong assumptions about the measurement properties of data16 and on the
functional form to get anywhere; and although data analysis might help constrain the
possibilities somewhat over certain dimensions (e.g., those traded in markets), much
of the exercise of selecting a welfare function is by definition normative and has
many degrees of freedom. There will likely be a multiplicity of acceptable functions,
and even if a unique welfare function could be agreed upon there is no unique
transformation from welfare function to poverty measure. Moreover, if one could
settle on a specific function to measure welfare, with a meaningful welfare indicator
for each individual, this would more naturally suggest the unidimensional approach
to poverty measurement with welfare as the aggregator and a welfare cutoff as the
target. It is the absence of such an aggregator that encourages the consideration of
the multidimensional approach.
An alternative exercise might be to see whether the tradeoffs implied by a poverty
measure are broadly consistent with some underlying notion of social welfare. This
is indeed a reasonable approach, but one whose conclusions are often ignored in
practice in deference to other favorable aspects of a measure. For example, the
headcount ratio, so commonly used in traditional poverty measurement exercises,
has the interesting property that any decrease in the income of a poor person (no
matter how large a decrease) paired with any increase in income for a nonpoor
person (no matter how small the increase) will leave poverty unchanged. This, of
course, is rather untenable from a welfare perspective. Likewise, any decrease in the
income of a poor person (no matter how large the decrease) paired with an increase
in the income of another poor person sufficient to lift the person to the poverty line
income (no matter how small the increase) will decrease poverty. Again, this would

14 It would be another matter to assert that a methodology is impossible to implement. This would
indeed be a type of general critique, but would require an evaluation of all calibrations, not just one.
15 Note that certain commonly-used unidimensional poverty measures, such as the FGT squared gap
index, do not have a direct welfare interpretation—hence this is not viewed as a requirement within
the literature. On the other hand, the FGT class is closely linked to welfare dominance [15, 30, 37].
16 See for example the discussion in Alkire and Foster [5] on the assumptions underlying the
Inequality Adjusted Human Development Index. In particular, ordinal or categorical variables can
be especially troubling.

Understandings and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty

309

appear to go against the judgement of any reasonable welfare function censored at
the poverty line. Note, though, that the fact that these tradeoffs are not justified in
welfare terms has not forced the removal of this measure from consideration. The
headcount ratio is a remarkably intuitive, if somewhat crude, measure that takes
the identification process very seriously and then reports a meaningful number: the
prevalence of poverty. The fact that it is at variance with notions of welfare would
appear to be of second order importance to practitioners who continue to highlight
it as the “headline” statistic.17
Similarly, the poverty gap implies a constant and unitary marginal rate of substitution between any two poor incomes (i.e., a marginal equal-sized transfer between
any two poor persons leaves the poverty gap unchanged). One might rather expect
that a progressive marginal transfer should result in a lower poverty level; or
equivalently, that the amount of income that needs to be given to a poorer poor
person to compensate for a $1 decrease in a richer poor person’s income would be
less than $1. This welfare-based argument would direct one instead to the distribution
sensitive poverty indices like the FGT, the Watts or the Sen index. And yet, the
poverty gap, which ignores the distribution or severity of poverty, is reported with
much greater frequency. The revealed preference evidence about practitioners’ use
of unidimensional measures suggests that simplicity or informational content of
certain poverty measures often trumps the favorable “marginal rate of substitution”
properties of others.
The main margin of analysis for unidimensional poverty measures is across people.
For multidimensional poverty measures there is another margin to be considered:
across the different dimensions of poverty. But how can we credibly account for
the deprivations of the poor if there is no aggregation system across dimensional
attainments (as was posited in the multidimensional case)? The AF methodology
takes the simplest way forward: it requires a positive value to be set for each
deprivation and then adds up (or averages) across these values to determine the
breadth of deprivations for the identification step and also for the adjusted headcount
ratio M0 . The other two measures figure in the depth or severity of deprivations, in
cases where the variables allow it. The values or weights afforded each deprivation
are straightforward in interpretation and lead to measures whose numerical values
convey meaning. As noted in the next section, they can be set in a variety of ways
suitable to the purpose of the poverty measurement methodology. Information on
how individuals themselves value deprivations can be part of the mix, as might a
broader perspective of society’s priorities, in arriving at this key subset of parameters
used to calibrate the AF methodology.
5.5 Calibration: who will choose parameters?
Our methodology is a general framework for measuring multidimensional poverty—
an open source technology that can be freely altered by the user to best match the
measure’s context and evaluative purpose. As with most measurement exercises,

17 When data have lower level measurement properties, such as when the variable is ordinal or
categorical, we may be forced to use the headcount ratio of some other counting measure that is
still meaningful in this context.

310

S. Alkire, J. Foster

it will be the designers who will have to make and defend the specific decisions
underlying the implementation, limited and guided by the purpose of the exercise
and by commonly held understandings of what that purpose entails. Traditional
unidimensional measures require decisions that are qualitatively similar. For example, should the variable be expenditure or income? What should the poverty cutoff
be? Other implementation choices are less apparent but can likewise be important
for final results, as we have seen with the recent updating of PPP values and the
subsequent impact on world poverty counts. Robustness tests are crucial both for
ensuring that the results obtained are not unduly dependent upon the calibration
choices and for allowing these choices to be made in the first place.18
For example, the multidimensional measure could seek to reflect capability
poverty. In this case then, following Sen [42, 44], the selection of relevant functionings is a value judgement, as is the selection of weights and cutoffs. There are various
procedures for making such value judgements. Ideally, recurrent participatory and
deliberative processes could be used to choose them, because done well (and if
inequalities in power and voice are managed well) these procedures have the
potential to facilitate the exchange of reasons, build consensus, and create legitimacy.
In other cases the choices might be made by a technical committee, and might
reflect participatory processes in other ways—for example by drawing on recent
participatory studies, a national plan, or the constitution. In any case, Sen stresses
the need to communicate the chosen parameters explicitly in the media and other
outlets, so they could be improved by public discussion and debate in the future.
The calibration choices will depend upon the purpose of the measure, such as the
space in which poverty is evaluated, the relevant comparisons across time or populations that the measure will inform, or the particular programmes or institutions which
will be evaluated. Calibration choices will also reflect data and resource constraints.
The flexibility in choice of parameters makes the AF methodology particularly
useful at the country level where measurement decisions can be made locally to
embody prevailing norms of what it means to be poor. For example, if dimensions,
weights and cutoffs are specified in a legal document such as the Constitution, the
identification function might be developed using an axiomatic approach, as was done
in Mexico.19 The weights can be developed by a range of process: expert opinion,
coherence with a consensus document such as a national plan, or the MDGs. And the
poverty cutoff, which is analogous to poverty lines in unidimensional space, could be
chosen so as to reflect policy needs and resources.20
It is helpful to subject measures to a series of robustness tests that check whether
the results obtained for an initial set of parameters are upheld for other plausible
parameter values. The tools can include formal dominance orderings, which indicate
when agreement exists for all values of one or more parameters, or simple empirical
robustness checks, which re-evaluate results for a finite number of alternative

18 For example, the variable poverty line robustness methods such as those found in [30] have helped
make the fundamentally arbitrary US$1.25 a day poverty line much more palatable.
19 See
20 On

Alkire and Foster [6].

the choice of dimensions see Alkire [1, 2]; on the choice of weights see Decancq and Lugo [25],
Alkire [3]; on the choice of poverty cutoffs see Alkire and Foster [7].

Understandings and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty

311

values.21 Clearly, the initial choice of parameters would be more difficult if important
comparisons were sensitive to small adjustments in them. By applying robustness
tests this sensitivity can be explored transparently.
In our view, enabling people to choose parameters according to a range of
processes provides an essential flexibility and adaptability to allow the measures
to be tailored to institutional, cultural, and data-specific circumstances. Also, the
AF methodology is relatively transparent, and this feature can be helpful when
parameters are set by (or at least opened to) public debate. It uses explicit indicators,
weights and cutoffs, so that serious shortcomings in the choice of parameters could
be debated and changed. To counterbalance and inform this flexibility, we suggest
the use of dominance results and of robustness and sensitivity tests, which will show
whether the key points of comparison are robust to a range of plausible parameter
choices.

6 Concluding remarks
The literature on unidimensional poverty measurement provides the bedrock for
wider approaches. This paper opened by observing how multidimensional measures
build upon and depart from these roots, for example through the application of
deprivation cutoffs in each dimension prior to the identification step. We then
introduced one particular methodology of multidimensional poverty measurement.
The AF methodology introduces a dual-cutoff identification method, while its aggregation methodology builds on the traditional FGT approach. The overall measures
as well as their sub-indices are intuitive and easy to interpret, and satisfy a set of
desirable properties such as decomposability. Although the AF methodology has a
specific structure for identification and aggregation, its implementation is flexible:
parameters such as dimensions, cutoffs, and weights can be chosen to reflect the
purpose of the measure and its context.
The value of having a poverty measure like M0 is that it can show change over time
in a unified and internally consistent framework. This overall picture of change can
be coherently and consistently deepened and sharpened by the more specific insights
contained in decompositions and partial indices. Understanding this combination—
an overview indicator that can give rise to a range of more specific analyses—is key
to our measurement approach.
We also clarified five misunderstandings that may arise when the AF methodology
is initially encountered. The first pertains to our fundamental use of the joint
distribution in constructing our measures. We require information on all of a person’s
achievements in order to determine if the person is poor. The joint distribution
is likewise incorporated into our measures of poverty, each of which may be

21 For example see Alkire and Foster [7] and Lasso de la Vega [36]; see also Alkire and Santos [8]
and Alkire et al. [11]. A stringent and full set of dominance conditions that ensure the robustness
of comparisons to widely varying weights, deprivation cutoffs, and poverty cutoffs, has been derived
in Yalonetzky [51]. Statistical tests for these conditions are available in Yalonetzky [53] for discrete
variables; and in Anderson [13], for continuous variables. Bennett and Singh [18] propose a test for
multiple hypotheses that allows the researcher to check the robustness of the cutoffs and compare
two groups. Yalonetzky [52] derives asymptotic standard errors for the basic statistics of the AF
family (H, A and M0 ), and their percentage changes for various sampling procedures.

312

S. Alkire, J. Foster

disaggregated by population subgroup or (after identification) by dimension to better
understand the structure of poverty. Note, though, that the dimensional decomposition creates dimensional sub-indices (like the censored headcount ratios) that also
rely fundamentally on achievements and deprivations across all dimensions—or the
joint distribution. In contrast, marginal methods aggregate up from the marginal
distributions, and decompose by dimension back to dimensional indices (like the
uncensored headcount ratios) where they began. A second misunderstanding is
related to implementation and data sources: because each variable must be linked
to a particular household, all variables normally must come from the same survey
source. We echo, therefore, the call of the Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi Committee
for better multi-topic household survey data. We also note that our methods can
incorporate qualitative or ordinal data, which are commonly available.
In 2010 our M0 methodology was used by Alkire and Santos [8] to develop a
Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) reflecting acute poverty in 104 developing
countries. That exercise revealed the applicability of this methodology, and stimulated interest in similar analyses. But it is easy to fall into a third misunderstanding:
that the particular MPI dimensions, indicators, cutoffs, and weights, are part of
the general methodology, instead of recognising the range of calibration choices
that are possible. The parameters chosen for the international MPI reflect acute
poverty across developing countries within strongly binding data constraints; other
specifications could be considered—for example to measure national poverty, target
beneficiaries, or evaluate a particular intervention.
Fourth, it might be assumed that multidimensional poverty methods have been
constructed without reference to a theoretical framework. In fact there is a mature
literature on axiomatic poverty measurement that has been brought over into
the multidimensional environment for evaluating prospective methodologies. While
links with welfare can provide a helpful way of interpreting poverty measures,
requiring such links can be detrimental: it drives poverty measurement towards
the economic variables that are the arguments of traditional welfare functions and
unidimensional poverty measures and away from new approaches to well-being and
capability. Conceptions and empirical measures of multidimensional welfare must be
improved before their potential implications for multidimensional poverty measurement become clear. In the meantime, axioms can imbue poverty methodologies with
welfare-related considerations, and likewise such methodologies can be criticised if
they fail to exhibit key properties.
Fifth and finally, multidimensional poverty measures can and often do take
form in active relationship with participatory and deliberative processes about what
poverty is and what current priorities might be. In particular, because the dimensions,
indicators, weights and cutoffs of our methodology are flexible, they can be filled in
in many ways. Robustness checks should normally be implemented to ensure that
key points of analysis are robust to a range of plausible parameters.
“Measurement...” as Sen put it, “is not an easy task.” In this paper we elucidate the
strengths, limitations, and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty methods
in order to clarify the debate and to catalyse further research. Of particular importance is ongoing clarification of what a multidimensional poverty methodology
is, what value-added it provides, and how axiomatic multidimensional poverty
methodologies are best evaluated. Naturally, there are many other topics of interest
including those related to preferences, weights, functional forms, data sources, and
statistical methods. One can anticipate a sustained and vigorous exchange of ideas.

Understandings and misunderstandings of multidimensional poverty

313

Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Angus Deaton, Jean-Yves Duclos,
Chrysanthi Hatzimasoura, Nora Lustig, Nicole Rippin, Maria Emma Santos, Shabana Singh, Gaston
Yalonetzky, and the participants of the IIEP Development Lunch for helpful comments, and
especially Martin Ravallion for helping to motivate the present piece.

References
1. Alkire, S.: Valuing Freedoms. Sen’s Capability Approach and Poverty Reduction. Oxford
University Press, New York (2002)
2. Alkire, S.: Choosing dimensions: the capability approach and multidimensional poverty. In:
Kakwani, N., Silber, J. (eds.) The Many Dimensions of Poverty, pp. 89–119. Macmillan,
New York (2008)
3. Alkire, S.: Multidimensional poverty and its discontents. (OPHI working paper series, 44) (2011)
4. Alkire, S., Foster, J.: Counting and multidimensional poverty measures. (OPHI working paper
series, 7) (2007)
5. Alkire, S., Foster, J.E.: Designing the Inequality-Adjusted Human Development Index.
(OPHI working paper series, 37) (2010)
6. Alkire, S., Foster, J.E.: An axiomatic approach to identification and measurement of multidimensional poverty. (OPHI Research in Progress, 21a) (2010)
7. Alkire, S., Foster, J.E.: Counting and multidimensional poverty measurement. J. Public Econ.
95(7–8), 476–487 (2011)
8. Alkire, S., Santos, M.E.: Acute multidimensional poverty: a new index for developing countries.
OPHI working paper series, 38 (2010)
9. Alkire, S., Seth, S.: Determining BPL status: some methodological improvements. Indian J. Hum.
Dev. 2(2), 407–24 (2009)
10. Alkire, S., Seth, S.: Decomposing India’s MPI by state and caste: examples and comparisons.
OPHI Research in Progress (2011)
11. Alkire, S., Santos, M.E., Seth, S., Yalonetzky, G.: Is the Multidimensional Poverty Index robust
to different weights? OPHI Research in Progress (2010)
12. Anand, S., Sen, A.: Concepts of Human Development and Poverty: A Multidimensional
Perspective. UNDP, New York (1997)
13. Anderson, G.: The empirical assessment of multidimensional welfare, inequality and poverty:
sample weighted multivariate generalizations of the Kolmogorov–Smirnov two sample tests for
stochastic dominance. J. Econ. Inequality Springer 6(1), 73–87 (2008)
14. Apablaza, M., Ocampo, J.P., Yalonetzky, G.: Decomposing changes in multidimensional poverty
for 10 countries. mimeo. (2010)
15. Atkinson, A.B.: On the measurement of poverty. Econometrica 55(4), 749–764 (1987)
16. Atkinson, A.: Poverty and Social Security. Harvester Wheatsheaf, New York (1989)
17. Atkinson, A.B.: Multidimensional deprivation: contrasting social welfare and counting approaches. J. Econ. Inequality 1(1), 51–65 (2003)
18. Bennett, C., Singh, S.: Multidimensional poverty: measurement, estimation and inference. Econ.
Rev. (2010, in press)
19. Bossert, W., Chakravarty, S.R., D’Ambrosio, D.: Multidimensional poverty and material deprivation. Working Papers 129, ECINEQ, Society for the Study of Economic Inequality (2009)
20. Bourguignon, F., Chakravarty, S.R.: The measurement of multidimensional poverty. J. Econ.
Inequality 1(1), 25–49 (2003)
21. Brandolini, A., D’Alessio, G.: Measuring Well-Being in the Functioning Space. Banco d’Italia
Reseach Department, Rome (1998)
22. Chakravarty, S.R., D’Ambrosio, C.: The measurement of social exclusion. Rev. Income Wealth
53(3), 377–398 (2006)
23. Chakravarty, S.R., Silber, J.: Measuring multidimensional poverty: the axiomatic approach. In:
Kakwani, N., Silber, J. (eds.) Quantitative Approaches to Multidimensional Poverty Measurement. Macmillan, Basingstoke (2008)
24. Chakravarty, S., Mukherjee, D., Renade, R.R.: On the family of subgroup and factor decomposable measures of multidimensional poverty. Res. Econ. Inequality 8, 175–194 (1998)
25. Decancq, K., Lugo, M.A.: Weights of multidimensional indices of well-being: an overview. Econ.
Rev. (2011, in press)

314

S. Alkire, J. Foster

26. Deutsch, J., Silber, J.: Measuring multidimensional poverty. An empirical comparison of various
approaches. Rev. Income Wealth 51, 145–174 (2005)
27. Duclos, J.-Y., Sahn, D.E., Younger, S.D.: Robust multidimensional poverty comparisons. Econ.
J. 116(514), 943–968 (2006)
28. Foster, J.E.: Poverty indices, in poverty, inequality and development. In: de Janvry, A., Kanbur,
R. (eds.) Essays in Honor of Erik Thorbecke. Academic, Dordrecht (2005)
29. Foster, J.E., Sen, A.K.: After a quarter century. In: Sen, A.K. (ed.) On Economic Inequality.
Clarendon, Oxford (1997)
30. Foster, J., Shorrocks, A.: Poverty orderings and welfare dominance. Soc. Choice Welf. 5(2–3),
179–198 (1988)
31. Foster, J., Greer, J., Thorbecke, E.: A class of decomposable poverty measures. Econometrica
52(3), 761–766 (1984)
32. Foster, J.E., McGillivray, M., Seth, S.: Rank robustness of composite indices. OPHI working
paper series, 26 (2009)
33. Foster, J.E., McGillivray, M., Seth, S.: Composite indices: rank robustness, statistical association,
and redundancy, mimeo (2011)
34. Kakwani, N., Silber, J.: The Many Dimensions of Poverty. MacMillan, Basingstoke (2008)
35. Kakwani, N., Silber, J.: Quantitative Approaches to Multidimensional Poverty Measurement.
Macmillan, Basingstoke (2008)
36. Lasso de la Vega, C.: Counting poverty orderings and deprivation curves. Res. Econ. Inequality
18, 153–172 (2010)
37. Ravallion, M.: Poverty Comparisons. Harwood, Switzerland (1994)
38. Ravallion, M.: Mashup indices of development. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper,
5432 (2010)
39. Ravallion, M.: On multidimensional indices of poverty. World Bank Policy Research Working
Papers, 5580 (2011)
40. Rippin, N.: Poverty Severity in a Multidimensional Framework: The Issue of Inequality Between
Dimensions. Courant Research Centre (CRC) Discussion Paper No. 47 (2010)
41. Sen, A.K.: Poverty: an ordinal approach to measurement. Econometrica 44(2), 219–231 (1976)
42. Sen, A.K.: In: Hawthorn, G. (ed.) The Standard of Living: The Tanner Lectures, pp. xiv, 125.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1987)
43. Sen, A.: Social progress index: some methodological issues. First Report to UNDP/Latin
America Bureau, mimeo (1989)
44. Sen, A.K.: Inequality Re-examined. Sage, New York (1992)
45. Stiglitz, J.E., Sen, A., Fitoussi, J.-P.: Report by the Commission on the Measurement of Economic
Performance and Social Progress (2009)
46. Thorbecke, E.: Multidimensional poverty: conceptual and measurement issues. In: Kakwani, N.,
Silber, J. (eds.) The Many Dimensions of Poverty. MacMillan, New York (2008)
47. Tsui, K.: Multidimensional poverty indices. Soc. Choice Welf. 19(1), 69–93 (2002)
48. UNDP: Human Development Report 1997: Human Development to Eradicate Poverty. Oxford
University Press, New York (1997)
49. UNDP: Human Development Report 2010: the Real Wealth of Nations: Pathways to Human
Development. Macmillan, New York (2010)
50. World Bank: World Development Report 2000/2001: Attacking Poverty. Oxford University
Press, New York (2000)
51. Yalonetzky, G.: Conditions for the most robust poverty comparisons using the Alkire-Foster
family of measures. mimeo, (2010)
52. Yalonetzky, G.: A note on the standard errors of the members of the Alkire-Foster family and
its components. (OPHI Research in Progress 25) (2011)
53. Yalonetzky, G.: Stochastic dominance with ordinal variables: conditions and a test. Econ. Rev.
(2011, in press)


