6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

Chapter 6. Distributional national accounts

Facundo Alvaredo, Lucas Chancel, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman
This chapter summarises concepts, methods, and goals of the WID.world project, the World
Inequality Database, along with some first results from this source. WID.world builds on
the experience of the World Top Incomes Database (WTID) to construct time-series on the
concentration of income at the very top of the distribution in more than 30 countries, to
include wealth distribution and developing as well as developed countries. The ultimate
goal of WID.world is to provide annual estimates of the distribution of income and wealth
using concepts consistent with macro-economic accounts, i.e. to construct distributional
national accounts (DINA). WID.world also aims to produce synthetic micro-files providing
online information on income and wealth (i.e. individual level data that do not result from
direct observation but rather through estimates that reproduce the observed distribution of
the underlying data). The long-run aim of the WID.world project is to release income and
wealth synthetic DINA micro-files for all countries on an annual basis.

Facundo Alvaredo is Professor and Co-Director of WID.world at Paris School of Economics and
IIEP-UBA-Conicet, Lucas Chancel is Co-Director of WID.world at Paris School of Economics and
IDDRI, Thomas Piketty is Professor and Co-Director of WID.world at Paris School of Economics,
Emmanuel Saez is Professor and Co-Director of WID.world at University of California, Berkeley,
and Gabriel Zucman is Professor and Co-Director of WID.world at the University of California,
Berkeley. This chapter summarises recent work behind the WID.world project. In particular, we
refer the reader to the following papers: Alvaredo et al., 2016; Piketty, Saez and Zucman, 2016; Saez
and Zucman, 2016; Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty, 2016, 2017; Piketty, Yang and Zucman,
2017; Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli, 2017, 2018; Alvaredo et al., 2017. We would like to thank,
for helpful discussions at the various meetings and seminars that took place since January 2014, the
members of the High-Level Expert Group on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social
Progress, as well as Marco Mira D’Ercole, Martine Durand, Jorrit Zwijnenburg, Peter Van de Ven
(all from the OECD Statistics and Data Directorate), and participants at the HLEG Workshop on
Measuring Inequalities of Income and Wealth (Berlin, September 2015).

The opinions expressed and arguments employed in the contributions below are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the official views of the OECD or of the governments of its member countries.

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

│ 143

144 │ 6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

6.1. Introduction
Renewed interest in the long-run evolution of the distribution of income and wealth has
given rise to a flourishing literature over the past 15 years. In particular, by combining
historical tax and national accounts data, a series of studies has constructed time-series of
the top income share for a large number of countries (see Piketty, 2001, 2003; Piketty and
Saez, 2003; and the two multi-country volumes on top incomes edited by Atkinson and
Piketty, 2007, 2010; see also Atkinson, Piketty and Saez, 2011; and Alvaredo et al., 2013
for surveys of this literature). These projects generated a large volume of data, intended as
a research resource for further analysis as well as a source to inform the public debate on
income inequality. To a large extent, this literature has followed the pioneering work and
methodology of Kuznets (1953) and Atkinson and Harrison (1978) on the long-run
evolution of income and wealth distribution, extending it to many more countries and years.
The World Top Incomes Database-WTID (Alvaredo et al., 2011-2015) was created in
January 2011 to provide convenient and free access to all the existing time series generated
by this stream of work. Thanks to the contributions of over a hundred researchers, the WTID
expanded to include time-series on income concentration for more than 30 countries,
spanning most of the 20th, the early 21st centuries and, in some cases, going back to the
19th century. The key innovation of this research has been to exploit tax, survey and
national accounts data in a systematic manner. This has permitted the estimation of longer
and more reliable time-series on the top income shares than previous inequality databases
(which generally rely on self-reported survey data, with usually large under-coverage and
under-reporting problems at the top, and limited time span). These new series had a large
impact on the discussion on global inequality. In particular, by making it possible to
compare the shares captured by top income groups (e.g. the top 1%) over long periods of
time and across countries, they contributed to reveal new facts and refocus the discussion
on rising inequality.
In December 2015 the WTID was subsumed into the WID.world, the World Wealth and
Income Database, renamed in 2017 the World Inequality Database. In addition to the
WTID top income shares series, the first version of WID.world included an updated
historical database on the long-run evolution of aggregate wealth-to-income ratios and on
the changing structure of national wealth and national income first developed in Piketty
and Zucman (2014).1 The name changed from WTID to WID.world in order to reflect the
extension in scope and ambition of the database, and the new emphasis on both wealth and
income.
In January 2017 a new website was also launched (www.wid.world), with better data
visualisation tools and more extensive data coverage. The database is currently being
extended into three main directions. First, the project aims to cover more developing
countries and not only developed countries; in recent years, tax information has been
released in a number of emerging economies, including China, Brazil, India, Mexico, and
South Africa. Second, WID.world plans to provide more and updated series on wealth-toincome ratios and the distribution of wealth, and not only on income. Third, we aim to
cover the entire distribution of income and wealth, and not only of top groups. The overall
long-run objective is to produce Distributional National Accounts (DINA).
The development of economic statistics is a historical lengthy process that involves
economic theory, the limits of available data, the construction of a body of conventions,
and the agreement of the community of scholars. Macro-economic aggregates (GDP,
national income) from the System of National Accounts (SNA) are the most widely used

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

measures of economic activity. In the beginning, national accountants were also experts in
distributional issues, as the inter-linkages between the estimation of national income and
its distribution were clearly recognised. However, the focus of the SNA has so far always
been on the main sectors in the economy, only distinguishing results for the household
sector as a whole, and not providing insights into disparities within the household sector.
Partly as a result of these developments, the discrepancies between income levels and
growth rates displayed in national accounts and the ones displayed in micro statistics and
underlying distributional data have been growing in all dimensions: income, consumption,
wealth (see, for example, Deaton, 2005; Bourguignon, 2015 and Nolan, Roser and
Thewissen, 2016). Scholars have been clearly aware of the discrepancies, and also have
some ideas to explain the reasons behind them, but systematic and co-ordinated action to
put them in a consistent framework has started only recently.2 In 2011, the OECD and
Eurostat launched a joint Expert Group to carry out a feasibility study on compiling
distributional measures of household income, consumption and saving within the
framework of national accounts, on the basis of micro data. This group, which was followed
up by an OECD Expert Group on Disparities in National Accounts (EG DNA) in 2014,
aimed to systematically combine micro- and macro-results to arrive at more granular
breakdowns of the household sector available from the national accounts (see Box 6.1 for
more information on the OECD project on disparities in the national accounts). One reason
why this work has only started recently is quite clear: it is not a simple task.
A renovated approach to the measurement of economic inequality consistent with macroaggregates should rebuild the bridges between distributional data available from micro
sources and national accounts aggregates in a systematic way. This is the main goal of the
WID.world project pursued through DINA. The aim is to provide annual estimates of the
distribution of income and wealth using concepts that are consistent with the macroeconomic national accounts. In this way, the analysis of growth and inequality can be
carried over in a coherent framework. In addition, the WID.world project aims to also
include the production of synthetic micro-files (i.e. individual level data that are not
necessarily the result of direct observation but rather through estimations that reproduce
the observed distribution of the underlying data, including the joint distribution of age,
gender, numbers of dependent children, income and wealth between adult individuals)
providing information on income and wealth, which will also be made available online.
The long-run aim is to release income and wealth synthetic DINA micro-files for all
countries on an annual basis. Such data could play a critical role in the public debate, and
be used as a resource for further analysis by various actors in civil society and in the
academic, business and political communities.

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

│ 145

146 │ 6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

Box 6.1. The work of the OECD Expert Group on Disparities in a National Accounts
Framework

In response to the increased interest in household material well-being and its distribution,
the OECD and Eurostat launched an expert group in 2011 to carry out a feasibility study
of compiling distributional measures of household income, consumption and saving
across household groups within the framework of the national accounts. A methodology
was developed according to a step-by-step approach that assists countries in building the
best conceptual link between the micro- and macro-data; closing any gaps between the
micro data and the national accounts totals; imputing for any items that may be lacking
in micro data sources; and linking data across sources to arrive at consistent sets of
accounts for various household groups. This work was continued in 2014 by an OECD
Expert Group on Disparities in a National Accounts framework (EG DNA) to improve
the methodology and to look into possibilities to improve the timeliness of the
distributional results. OECD Member countries have engaged in two exercises to
compile experimental distributional results and some countries have already started to
publish their estimates (Australia, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom).
The EG DNA project has a lot of similarities with the DINA project, as both projects
aim to compile distributional results in line with national accounts totals and try to
overcome any discrepancies between the micro- and the macro-totals. Where DINA is
focusing on income and wealth, the OECD project initially focuses on income,
consumption and saving, planning to include wealth in the second phase, probably in cooperation with the European Central Bank (ECB) and Eurostat. While there are
similarities, the projects also differ in some respects. First of all, the aim of the EG DNA
project is to arrive at breakdowns of the household sector from the national accounts at
an aggregated level, focusing on specific household groups, e.g. classified by income
quintile, main source of income or household composition, whereas DINA also aims at
to produce synthetic micro-data files for income and wealth. Secondly, the two projects
apply different income definitions in deriving distributional results: whereas DINA aims
to align the results to national income, i.e. for the economy as a whole (distinguishing
five income concepts), the EG DNA project specifically targets the income of the
household sector, with primary income, disposable income and adjusted disposable
income as main aggregates. A third difference relates to the unit of observation: while
the DINA project focuses on individuals aged 20 years and older, the EG DNA considers
the income of households (under the assumption that income is fully shared and that
consumption decisions are made within the household), using equivalence scales to
adjust for differences in household size and composition. These two methodological
differences may lead to differences in distributional results derived from both projects.
Since the start of the OECD project, member countries have engaged in two exercises
compiling first sets of experimental distributional results. Figure 6.1 presents an example
of results derived from the exercise conducted in 2015: it presents estimates of the
S80/S20 ratio, comparing the income of households in the highest income quintile with
that of households in the lowest quintile. On the basis of these results, income inequality
turns out to be very high in Mexico, followed by the United States and Switzerland,
whereas it is smallest in Slovenia, followed by the Netherlands, France and Sweden. In
addition to distributional results by income quintile, the experimental results also contain
breakdowns into main source of income and household composition for a selection of

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

│ 147

countries, as well as information on the socio-demographic composition of the income
quintiles.
Figure 6.1. Ratio of household adjusted disposable of households in the top and bottom
income quintiles
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

SVN

NLD

FRA

SWE

GBR

AUT

AUS

PRT

ISR

CHE

USA

MEX

Note: Data refers to 2012 and 2011 for Australia, France, Netherlands, Portugal and Switzerland.
Source: Zwijnenburg, J., S. Bournot and F. Giovannelli (2017), “Expert group on disparities in a national
accounts framework: Results from the 2015 exercise”, OECD Statistics Working Papers, No. 2016/10, OECD
Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/2daa921e-en.
StatLink 2 http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/888933839696

While some countries have already started to publish distributional results according to
EG DNA methodology, the OECD Expert Group is pursuing its work to improve the
methodology to arrive at more robust and comparable results across a broader range of
countries. In that perspective, the project faces similar challenges as the DINA,
particularly in obtaining a better understanding of the reasons for gaps between micro
data and national accounts totals, gaps which for some items are very substantial; and in
improving the methodology to impute for items for which micro data are lacking. This
should lead to a more robust methodology and to the publication of distributional results
for a broader range of countries within the next couple of years.
Source: Text provided by Jorrit Zwijnenburg, OECD Statistics and Data Directorate.

It is worth stressing that the WID.world database has both a macro- and a micro-dimension.
The objective is to release homogenous time-series both on the macro-level structure of
national income and national wealth, and on the micro-level distribution of income and
wealth, using consistent concepts and methods. By doing so, we hope to contribute to
reconciling inequality measurement and national accounting, i.e. the micro-level
measurement of economic and social welfare and the macro-level measurement. In some
cases, this may require revising central aspects of key national accounts concepts and
estimates. By combining the macro- and micro-dimensions of economic measurement, we
are following a very long tradition. In particular, it is worth recalling that Simon Kuznets

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

148 │ 6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS
was both one of the founders of US national accounts (and author of the first national
income series), and also the first scholar to combine national income series and income tax
data in order to estimate the evolution of the share of total income going to top fractiles in
the United States over 1913-48 (Kuznets, 1953).3 This line of research continued with
Atkinson and Harrison (1978), who made use of historical inheritance tax data and capital
income data to study the long-run evolution of the distribution of personal wealth in Britain
over 1922-72. We are simply pushing this effort further by trying to cover more countries
and years, and by studying wealth and its distribution rather than only income.
Such an ambitious long-term objective – annual distributional national accounts for both
income and wealth and for all countries in the world – will require a broad international
and institutional partnership. The first set of methodological principles and
recommendations are being set by ongoing work on the first version of the DINA
Guidelines (Alvaredo et al., 2016). There are still many methodological decisions to be
taken and agreed upon. It took from the 1910s to the 1950s before scholars (Kuznets,
Kendrick, Dugé, Stone, Meade, Frankel) could hand over the estimation of national income
to official statistics bodies. It also took a long time (from the 1950s to the 2000s) before
official national accounts were able to include standardised stock accounts. In fact, the first
consistent guidelines for balance sheets – covering stocks of assets and liabilities – appear
in the SNA manuals of 1995 and 2008 (in some key countries, such as Germany, the first
official balance sheets were released only in 2010). Along the same lines, the development
of a system of DINA is expected to take a long time before consensus among scholars and
the statistical community is reached. In that regard, it is very encouraging that the OECD
Expert Group on Disparities in National Accounts, which is working on compiling
distributional results, has already engaged in two exercises, and that the first countries have
already started to publish distributional results on the basis of the Expert Group’s
methodology (Box 6.1).
We should stress at the outset that our methods and time-series are imperfect, fragile and
subject to revision. The WID.world DINA project attempts to combine the different data
sources that are available (in particular tax data, survey data and national accounts) in a
systematic way. We also try to provide a very detailed and explicit description of our
methodology and sources, so that other users can contribute to improving them. But our
time-series and methods should be viewed in the perspective of a long, cumulative,
collective process of data construction and diffusion, rather than as a finished product.

6.2. What are the concepts and methods being discussed?
The concepts and methods used in WTID series were initially exposed in the two collective
volumes edited by Atkinson and Piketty (2007 and 2010), and in the corresponding country
chapters and research articles. All country-level time-series follow the same general
principles: building on the pioneering work of Kuznets (1953), they combine income tax
data, national accounts and Pareto interpolation techniques in order to estimate the share of
total income going to top income groups (typically the top decile and the top percentile).
However, despite our best efforts, the units of observation, the income concepts and the
Pareto interpolation techniques were never made fully homogenous over time and across
countries. Moreover, for the most part attention was restricted to the top income decile,
rather than the entire distribution of income and wealth.
In contrast, the DINA time-series and associated synthetic micro-files aim to be fully
homogenous across all of these dimensions (or at least to make much more explicit the
remaining heterogeneity in data construction) and, most importantly, to provide more
FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

detailed and comprehensive measures of inequality. In the DINA series, inequality is
always measured using homogenous observation units, and taxable income reported on
fiscal returns is systematically corrected and upgraded in order to match national accounts
totals separately for each income category (wages, dividends, etc.) using various sources,
imputation methods and techniques to align the micro and macro-data. Now WID.world
aims to provide series on wealth (and not only on income) and on the entire distribution
(and not only on top shares).
The two main data sources used in the DINA series continue to be income tax data and
national accounts (just like in the WTID series), but we use these two core data sources in
a more systematic and consistent manner, with fully harmonised definitions and methods,
and together with other sources such as household income and wealth surveys, inheritance,
estate and wealth tax data, as well as wealth rankings provided by “rich lists” compiled by
the press. In most cases, the general trends in inequality depicted in the WTID series will
not be very different in DINA series.4 However the latter will allow for more precise
comparisons over time and across countries, more systematic world coverage, and more
consistent analysis of the underlying mechanisms.5
In the DINA Guidelines (Alvaredo et al., 2016) the following key elements used in
WID.world are discussed at length:


The units of observation.



The income concepts (pre-tax national income, pre-tax factor income, post-tax
disposable income, post-tax national income, and fiscal income) and the wealth
concepts (personal wealth, private wealth, public wealth, corporate wealth, and
national wealth, as well as the corresponding notions of capital income flows and
rates of return).



The methods (e.g. imputation) employed to reconcile income tax returns and
household survey micro files with national accounts totals, as well as with wealth
inequality sources.



The methods employed to produce synthetic micro files on income and wealth.



The methods that can be used in the case of countries and time periods with more
limited data sources.

In this section, we briefly refer to the units of observation and the income and wealth
concepts used in WID.world, but the interested reader should consult the DINA Guidelines
for the full documentation, and a thorough investigation of details, problems, limitations
and challenges.
As was the case with the development of national accounts, the methodological discussion
starts from the perspective of the developed countries, given the higher (though not perfect)
quality and availability of data from all sources. A number of additional and important
problems arise when we consider developing countries. In many cases, e.g. in China, India
or Mexico today, we only have income tax data for the top of the distribution, and the
questions involve how to combine them with the household survey data that exist for the
lower part of the distribution, and even the representativeness of tax data. Piketty, Yang
and Zucman (2017) provide an illustration for the case of China. In this respect, it should
also be noted that in developing countries the underground and informal economy may play
a more significant role than in developed countries, possibly requiring different imputation
techniques and different means of bridging gaps between micro data and national accounts
totals. Additionally, the discrepancies of both levels and trends from the existing data
FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

│ 149

150 │ 6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS
sources can be very large (Bourguignon, 2015) and deserve special and case-by-case
attention.

6.2.1. The units of observation
One of the major limitations of the WTID series was the lack of homogeneity of the microlevel observation unit. Most WTID series were constructed by using the ‘tax unit’ (as
defined by the tax law of the country at any given point in time) as the observation unit. In
joint-taxation countries like France or the United States, the tax unit has always been
defined as the married couple (for married individuals) or the single adult (for unmarried
individuals), and the top income shares series that were produced for these two countries
did not include any correction for the changing structure of tax units (i.e. the combined
income of married couples is not divided by two, so couples appear artificially richer than
non-married individuals). This is problematic, since variations in the share of single
individuals in the population, or in the extent of assortative mating in couples (being in a
couple with a person similar to you socio-economically), could potentially bias the
evolution of income inequality in various and contradictory ways. In some other countries,
the tax system switched to individual taxation over the course of the history of the income
tax (e.g., in 1990 in the United Kingdom), which creates other comparability problems in
the WTID series (see Atkinson, 2005, 2007).
In order to correct for these biases, our DINA series try to use homogenous observation
units. Generally speaking, our benchmark unit of observation is the adult individual. That
is, our primary objective is to provide estimates of the distribution of income and wealth
between all individuals aged 20 years-old and over (such as the shares of income and wealth
going to the different percentiles of the distributions of income and wealth). Whenever
possible, we also aim to construct estimates of individual income and wealth distribution
that can be decomposed by age, gender and number of dependent children. Ideally, we aim
at producing synthetic micro-files providing the best possible estimates of the joint
distribution – by age, gender and number of dependent children – of income and wealth
between adult individuals. But at the very least we want to be able to describe the
distribution of income and wealth between all adult individuals.
One key question is how to split income and wealth between adults who belong to a couple
(married or not) and/or to the same household (i.e. adults who live in the same housing
unit). To the extent possible, we want to produce for each country two sets of inequality
series: “equal-split-adults series” and “individualistic-adults series”. In the equal-split
series, we split income and wealth equally between adults who belong to the same couple.
In the individualistic series, we attribute income and wealth to each individual income
recipient and wealth owner (to the extent possible).
We should make clear that both series are equally valuable in our view. They offer two
complementary perspectives on different dimensions of inequality. The equal-split
perspective assumes that couples redistribute income and wealth equally between their
members. This is arguably a very optimistic perspective on what couples actually do:
bargaining power is typically very unequal within couples, partly because the two members
come with unequal income flows or wealth stocks. But the opposite perspective (zero
sharing of resources) is not realistic either, and tends to underestimate the resources
available to non-working spouses (and therefore to overestimate inequality in societies with
low female participation in the labour market). By offering the two sets of series, we give
the possibility to compare the levels and evolutions of inequality over time and between
countries under these two different perspectives. Ideally, the best solution would be to

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

organise synthetic micro-files in such a manner that the data users can compute their own
inequality series based upon some alternative sharing rules (e.g. assuming that a given
fraction of the combined income of couples is equally split) and/or some alternative
equivalence scales (e.g. dividing the income of couples by a factor less than two). This is
our long-run objective.
Regarding the equal-split series, an important question is whether we should split income
and wealth within the couple (narrow equal-split) or within the household (broad equalsplit). In countries with significant multi-generational cohabitation (e.g. grandparents
living with their adult children), this can make a significant difference (typically broad
equal-split series assume more private redistribution and display less inequality). In
countries where nuclear families are prevalent, this makes relatively little difference.
Ideally both series should be offered. We tend to favour the narrow equal-split series as the
benchmark series, both for data availability reasons (fiscal data are usually available at the
tax unit level, which in a number of countries means the married couple or the non-married
adult) and because there is possibly more splitting of resources at the narrow level (which
is also arguably the reason why fiscal legislation usually offers the possibility of joint filling
and taxation at the level of the married couple rather than at the level of the broader
household, whose exact composition can vary and is not regulated by a legal relationship).
However in countries where fiscal sources are limited and where we mostly rely on
household survey data (e.g. in China), it is sometime easier to compute the broad equalsplit series. This should be kept in mind when making comparisons between countries (see
the discussion in Piketty, Yang and Zucman, 2017) and the comparison between DINA
series for China, France and the United States).
Finally, when we look at inequality of post-tax disposable income, we introduce dependent
children into the analysis, in order to be able to compute the relevant cash and in-kind
transfers to parents (family benefits and tax credits, education allowances, etc.).
In the individualistic series, observed labour income and pension income is attributed to
each individual recipient. This is easy to do in individual-taxation countries like the United
Kingdom today, where by definition we observe incomes at the individual level. In general,
labour income and pension income are also reported separately for each spouse in the tax
returns and income declarations used in joint-taxation countries like France. In some cases,
however, e.g. in US public-use tax files, we only observe the total labour or pension income
reported by both spouses, in which case we need to use other sources and imputation
techniques in order to split income appropriately between spouses (see Piketty, Saez and
Zucman, 2016).
The issues are more complicated for capital income flows. In individual-taxation countries,
we usually observe capital income at the individual level. However in joint-taxation
countries, capital income is usually not reported separately for both spouses, and we
generally do not have enough information about the marriage contract or property
arrangements within married couples to be able to split capital income and assets into
common assets and own assets. So in joint-taxation countries we simply assume in our
benchmark series that each spouse owns 50% of the wealth of a married couple and receives
50% of the corresponding capital income flow. If and when adequate data sources become
available, we might be able to offer a more sophisticated treatment of this important issue.

6.2.2. The income and wealth concepts
One of the other major limitations of the WTID time-series was the lack of homogeneity of
the income concept and its dependence on the tax laws of each country. In contrast, the

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

│ 151

152 │ 6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS
income concepts used in DINA series are defined in the same manner in all countries and
time periods, and aim to be independent of the tax legislation of the given country/year.
We use four basic pre-tax and post-tax income concepts to measure income inequality:
1) pre-tax national income; 2) pre-tax factor income; 3) post-tax disposable income; and
4) post-tax national income (see Alvaredo et al., 2016, for a detailed discussion of
definitions and challenges).6 All of them are anchored on the notion of national income (i.e.
gross domestic product, minus consumption of fixed capital, plus net foreign income, for
the economy as a whole) defined by using the same concepts as those proposed in the latest
international guidelines on national accounts, as set forth by the 2008 UN System of
National Accounts (SNA). However, in attributing income to the household sector we apply
a broader definition than is used in the 2008 SNA, as we also distribute the income of the
other sectors in the economy (i.e. corporations, general government and non-profit
institutions), rather than focusing on the household sector as defined in the national
accounts. In the same way as for the income concepts, our wealth concepts refer to the
latest international national accounts guidelines, based on which we define personal wealth,
private wealth, public wealth, corporate wealth, and national wealth.7
We should make clear at the outset that our choice of using national accounts income and
wealth concepts for distributional analysis certainly does not mean that we believe that
these concepts are perfectly satisfactory or appropriate. Quite the contrary: our view is that
official national accounts statistics are insufficient and need to be greatly improved. In
particular, one of the central limitations of official GDP accounting is that it does not
provide any information about the extent to which the different social groups benefit from
GDP growth. By using national accounts concepts and producing distributional series based
upon these concepts, we hope to contribute to addressing one important shortcomings of
existing national accounts, to reduce the gap between inequality measurement and national
accounts, and also maybe between the popular individual-level perception of economic
growth and its macro-economic measurement. The other reason for using national accounts
concepts is simply that these concepts represent at this stage the only existing systematic
attempt to define notions such as income and wealth in a common way, which (at least in
principle) can be applied to all countries independently from country-specific and timespecific legislation and data sources.
One important limitation of existing official national accounts is the fact that consumption
of fixed capital does not usually include the consumption of natural resources. In other
words, official statistics tend to overestimate both the levels and the growth rates of national
income, which in some cases could be much lower than those obtained for Gross Domestic
Product. In the future, we plan to gradually introduce such adjustments to the aggregate
national income series provided in the WID.world database. This is likely to introduce
significant changes both at the aggregate and distributional level. We should also make
clear that official national accounts are fairly rudimentary in a number of developing
countries (and also sometimes in developed countries). Often they do not include the level
of detail that we need to use the income and wealth definitions proposed below. In
particular, proper series on consumption of fixed capital and net foreign income are missing
in a number of countries, so that official series do not always allow national income to be
computed.8

6.2.3. Countries/years with limited income and wealth data
The construction of DINA series is very demanding in terms of data needs. Countries do
not usually have all the data sources required, the limitations being very pronounced in
many countries/years. This problem was also at the centre of the development of national
FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

accounts: designing the SNA meant accepting that the standards could not be set at the level
of the best, i.e. their implementation had to be feasible in less well-advanced countries.
Methods need to be developed in the case of countries and periods with more limited data
sources, typically on the basis of income tax tabulations rather than income tax micro-files,
and/or with income tax data covering only a subset of the population rather than the entire
population, and/or inadequacy of income tax data (e.g. due to large or complete exemptions
for capital incomes). The DINA Guidelines refer to each of these problems and illustrate
the methods that can be applied with the case of China (a country with limited access to
income tax data; see Piketty, Yang and Zucman, 2017) and France (a country with detailed
tax data but where only income tax tabulations – rather than micro-files – are available
prior to 1970; see Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty, 2017).9

6.3. What can we say based on available evidence? First results from WID.world
and DINA
6.3.1. Income inequality dynamics: The United States, China, France
We first present some selected results on income inequality for the United States, China,
and France (a country that is broadly representative of the West European pattern) in
Figure 6.2. All series shown follow the same general DINA Guidelines (Alvaredo et al.,
2016). National accounts, surveys, and fiscal data are combined in a systematic manner in
order to estimate the full distribution of pre-tax national income (including tax exempt
capital income and undistributed profits). For more detailed results and discussions, we
refer to the country-specific papers (Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2016) for the United States;
Piketty, Yang and Zucman (2017) for China; Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty (2017)
for France).10
The combination of tax and survey data leads to a markedly upward revision of the official
inequality estimates of China. The corrected top 1% income share is around 13% of total
income in 2015, as compared to 6.5% in survey data. We stress that these estimates should
be viewed as lower bounds, due to tax evasion and other limitations of tax and national
accounts data, but we regard them as more realistic and plausible than survey-based
estimates. The estimates illustrate the need for more systematic use of administrative
records, even for countries where the tax administration is far from perfect. China had very
low income inequality levels in the late 1970s, but it is now approaching the United States,
where income concentration is the highest among the countries shown. In particular, we
observe a complete collapse of the bottom 50% income share in the United States between
1978 and 2015, from 20% to 12% of total income, while the income share of the top 1%
rose from 11% to 20%. In contrast, and in spite of a similar qualitative trend, the share of
the bottom 50% remains higher than the top 1% share in 2015 in China and, even more so,
in France.11

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

│ 153

154 │ 6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS
Figure 6.2. Distribution of income in China, the United States and France, 1978-2015
Panel A. Top 1% income share
22%

China

US

Panel B. Bottom 50% income share
France

28%

China

US

France

20%

26%

18%

24%

16%

22%

14%

20%

12%

18%

10%

16%

8%

14%

6%

12%

4%
1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006 2010 2014

10%
1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006 2010 2014

Note: Distribution of pre-tax national income (before taxes and transfers, except for pensions and
unemployment insurance benefits) among adults. Corrected estimates combine survey, fiscal, wealth and
national accounts data. Equal-split adult series (the income of married couples is divided by two).
Sources: US: Piketty, T., E. Saez and G. Zucman (2016), “Distributional national accounts: Methods and
estimates for the United States”, NBER Working Paper, No. 22945; France: Garbinti, B., J. Goupille-Lebret
and T. Piketty (2017), “Income inequality in France, 1900-2014: Evidence from Distributional National
Accounts (DINA)”, WID.world Working Paper, No. 2017/4; China: Piketty, T., L. Yang and G. Zucman
(2017), “Capital accumulation, private property and rising inequality in China 1978-2015”, WID.world
Working Paper, No. 2017/6.
StatLink 2 http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/888933839677

In light of the massive fall of the pre-tax incomes of the bottom 50% in the United States,
our findings also suggest that policy discussions about rising global inequality should focus
on how to equalise the distribution of primary assets – including human capital, financial
capital, and bargaining power – rather than merely discussing ex-post redistribution
through taxes and transfers. Policies that could raise the pre-tax incomes of the bottom 50%
include improved education and access to skills, which may require major changes in the
system of education finance and admission; reforms of labour market institutions, including
minimum wage, corporate governance, and workers’ bargaining power through unions and
representation in the board of directors; and steeply progressive taxation, which can affect
pay determination and pre-tax distribution, particularly at the top end (Piketty, Saez and
Stantcheva, 2014; Piketty, 2014).
The comparison between the United States, China and France illustrates how DINA can be
used to analyse the distribution of economic growth across income groups. As shown in
Table 6.1, national income per adult increased in the three countries between 1978 and
FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

2015: by 811% in China, by 59% in the United States, and by 39% in France. Nevertheless,
performance has been very different across the distribution. There has been a clear pattern
of rising inequality: top income groups enjoyed higher growth. In China, people at the top
experienced very high growth rates of their income, but average growth was so large that
the average income of the bottom 50% also grew markedly, by 401%. This is likely to make
rising inequality more acceptable. In contrast, there was no growth at all for the bottom
50% in the United States (-1%). France illustrates another type of situation: people at the
very top of the distribution experienced above-average income growth, but this pattern of
rising inequality happened only for very high and numerically relatively negligible groups,
so that it had limited consequences for the majority of the population. In effect, the bottom
50% income group enjoyed the same income growth as average growth (39%).
Table 6.1. Real income growth across the distribution, 1978-2015
Percentages
Income group (distribution of per-adult pre-tax national income)
Full Population
Bottom 50%
Middle 40%
Top 10%
Top 1%
Top 0.1%
Top 0.01%
Top 0.001%

China
811
401
779
1 294
1 898
2 261
2 685
3 111

US
59
-1
42
115
198
321
453
685

France
39
39
35
44
67
84
93
158

Note: Distribution of pre-tax national income (before taxes and transfers, except pensions and unemployment
insurance benefits) among adults. Corrected estimates combining survey, tax, wealth and national accounts
data. Equal-split-adult series (income of married couples divided by two).
Sources: US: Piketty, T., E. Saez and G. Zucman (2016), “Distributional national accounts: Methods and
estimates for the United States”, NBER Working Paper, No. 22945; France: Garbinti, B., J. Goupille-Lebret
and T. Piketty (2017), “Income inequality in France, 1900-2014: Evidence from Distributional National
Accounts (DINA)”, WID.world Working Paper, No. 2017/4; China: Piketty, T., L. Yang and G. Zucman
(2017), “Capital accumulation, private property and rising inequality in China 1978-2015”, WID.world
Working Paper, No. 2017/6.
StatLink 2 http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/888933839658

6.3.2. Private and public wealth-to-income ratios: The United States, China,
France, the United Kingdom, Japan, Norway and Germany
Next, we present findings on the evolution of aggregate wealth. We observe a general rise
of the ratio between net private wealth and national income in nearly all countries in recent
decades. It is striking to see that this phenomenon was largely unaffected by the 2008
financial crisis. The unusually large rise of the ratio for China is notable: net private wealth
was a little above 100% of national income in 1978, while it was above 450% in 2015. The
private wealth-to-income ratio in China is now approaching the levels observed in the
United States (500%), the United Kingdom and France (550-600%).
The structural rise of private wealth-to-income ratios in recent decades is due to a
combination of factors, which can decomposed into: 1) volume factors (high saving rates,
which can themselves be due to ageing and/or rising inequality, with differing relative
importance across countries, combined with growth slowdown); 2) relative asset prices;
and 3) institutional factors, including the increase of real estate prices (which can be due
to housing portfolio bias, the gradual lift of rent controls, and lower technical progress in

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

│ 155

156 │ 6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS
construction and transportation technologies as compared to other sectors) and of stock
prices (which can reflect higher power of shareholders leading to the observed increase in
Tobin’s Q ratios – i.e. the ratio between market and book value of corporations).
Another key institutional factor driving the rise of private wealth-to-income ratios is the
gradual transfer from public wealth to private wealth. This is particularly spectacular in the
case of China, where the share of public wealth in national wealth dropped from about 70%
in 1978 to 35% by 2015, as shown in Figure 6.3. The corresponding rise of private property
has important consequences for the levels and dynamics of inequality. Net public wealth
has become negative in the United States, Japan and the United Kingdom, and is only
slightly positive in Germany and France. This arguably limits government ability to
redistribute income. The only exceptions to the general decline in public property are oilrich countries with large public sovereign funds, such as Norway.
Figure 6.3. The decline of public property and the rise of sovereign funds
Share of public wealth in national wealth

China

US

Japan

France

UK

Germany

Norway

80%

70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
-10%
1978

1982

1986

1990

1994

1998

2002

2006

2010

2014

Note: Share of net public wealth (public assets minus public debt) in net national wealth (private + public).
Source: China: Piketty, T., L. Yang and G. Zucman (2017), “Capital accumulation, private property and rising
inequality in China 1978-2015”, WID.world Working Paper, No. 2017/6; other countries: Piketty, T. and G. Zucman
(2014), “Capital is back: Wealth-income ratios in rich countries, 1700-2010”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 129(3), pp. 1255-1310, and WID.world updates.
StatLink 2 http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/888933839715

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

6.3.3. Wealth inequality dynamics: The United States, China, France and the
United Kingdom
Finally, we present findings on wealth inequality in Figure 6.4. We stress that currently
available statistics on the distribution of wealth are highly imperfect. More transparency
and better access to administrative and banking data sources are sorely needed if we want
to gain knowledge of the underlying evolutions. In WID.world, we combine different
sources and methods to reach robust conclusions: the income capitalisation method (using
income tax returns), the estate multiplier method (using inheritance and estate tax returns),
wealth surveys, national accounts and “rich lists”. Nevertheless, our series should still be
viewed as imperfect, provisional, and subject to revision. We provide full access to our data
files and computer codes so that everybody can use them and contribute to improving the
data collection.12
Figure 6.4. Top 1% wealth share in China, the United States, France and
the United Kingdom, 1890-2015

US

UK

France

China

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%
1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Note: Distribution of net personal wealth among adults. Corrected estimates (combining survey, fiscal, wealth
and national accounts data). For China, US and France, equal-split-adult series (wealth of married couples
divided by two); for UK, adult series.
Source: US: Saez, E. and G. Zucman (2016), “Wealth inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence
from capitalized income tax data”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 131(2), pp. 519-578; UK:
Alvaredo, F., A.B. Atkinson and S. Morelli (2018), “Top wealth shares in the UK over more than a century”,
forthcoming, The Journal of Public Economics and Alvaredo, F., A.B. Atkinson and S. Morelli (2017), “Top
wealth shares in the UK over more than a century”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 11759; France: Garbinti, B.,
J. Goupille-Lebret and T. Piketty (2016), “Accounting for wealth inequality dynamics: Methods, estimates and
simulations for France (1800-2014)”, WID.world Working Paper, No. 2016/5; China: Piketty, T., L. Yang and
G. Zucman (2017), “Capital accumulation, private property and rising inequality in China 1978-2015”,
WID.world Working Paper, No. 2017/6.
StatLink 2 http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/888933839734

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

│ 157

158 │ 6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS
We observe a large rise of top wealth shares in the United States and China in recent
decades, and a more moderate rise in France and the United Kingdom. A combination of
factors explains these trends. First, higher income inequality and severe bottom-income
stagnation explain higher wealth inequality in the United States. Next, the very unequal
process of privatisation and access by Chinese households to quoted and unquoted equity
probably played an important role in the very fast rise of wealth concentration in China.
The potentially large mitigating impact of high real estate prices should also be taken into
account; this effect, which benefitted the middle class, is likely to have been particularly
strong in France and the United Kingdom, where housing prices have increased
significantly relative to stock prices.
Given all these factors, it is not easy to predict whether the observed trend of rising
concentration of wealth will continue. In the long run, steady-state wealth inequality
depends on the inequality of saving rates across income and wealth groups, inequality of
labour incomes and of rates of returns to wealth, and the progressivity of income and wealth
taxes. Numerical simulations show that the response of steady-state wealth inequality to
relatively small changes in these structural parameters can be large (Saez and Zucman,
2016; Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty, 2016). This instability reinforces the need for
increased democratic transparency about the dynamics of income and wealth.

6.4. Conclusions
We have very briefly described the basic concepts, sources and methods that we apply in
the World Inequality Database (WID.world) and in the development of the DINA project.
We should stress again that these methods are fragile, exploratory and subject to revision.
As more countries join the database, new lessons will be learned, and the methods will be
refined and updated. Accordingly, new updated versions of the DINA Guidelines will be
regularly released on WID.world.
We have also presented selected results on income and wealth inequality dynamics based
on the DINA project. Global inequality dynamics involve strong and contradictory forces.
We observe rising top income and wealth shares in nearly all countries in recent decades.
But the magnitude of rising inequality varies substantially across countries, suggesting that
different country-specific policies and institutions matter considerably. High-GDP growth
rates in emerging countries reduce between-country inequality, but this in itself does not
guarantee acceptable within-country inequality levels and ensure the social sustainability
of globalisation. Access to more and better data (administrative records, surveys, more
detailed national accounts, etc.) is critical to monitor global inequality dynamics, as this is
a key building block both to properly understand the present as well as the forces which
will dominate in the future, and to design appropriate policy responses.

Notes
1. See also Piketty (2014) for an interpretative historical synthesis on the basis of this new material
and of the top income shares time-series.
2. Social Accounts Matrices are a related precedent.
3. Kuznets (1953) was preceded by ten years in this by Frankel and Herzfeld (1943), who made
estimates of the European income distribution in South Africa based on the income tax returns,
making use of control totals from the census of population and from the national accounts.

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

│ 159

4. Results of these comparisons are already available for France (Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and
Piketty, 2017) and the United States (Piketty, Saez and Zucman, 2016).
5. As new DINA series become available, we will systematically compare the inequality trends
obtained in the old and the new series, and analyse the sources of biases.
6. We also keep the fiscal income definition associated with the first top income share series
(Atkinson and Piketty, 2007, 2010; Alvaredo et al., 2011-15).
7. Readers are referred to the DINA Guidelines Appendix, where we provide an Excel file with the
formulas linking the income and wealth definitions to the SNA 2008 classification codes.
8. WID.world provides estimates of the consumption of fixed capital in countries where these series
are not available in SNA series. WID.world also estimates missing income from tax havens to correct
net foreign income flows (see Blanchet and Chancel (2016) for a discussion of methods). While
these imputations are far from fully satisfactory, they increase the level of comparability of national
income aggregates across countries.
9. The DINA Guidelines also discuss how the initial WTID time series, based on a fiscal income
concept, can be corrected so as to be more directly comparable to new DINA series. In order to
construct DINA/WID.world series for countries and time periods with limited data, we strongly
recommend using the “Generalized Pareto interpolation” (gpinter) web interface available on-line
(http://WID.world/gpinter). See Blanchet, Fournier and Piketty (2017) for full technical details on
Pareto curves and the corresponding interpolation techniques.
10. The series for China make use of the data recently released by the tax administration on highincome taxpayers and include a conservative adjustment for the undistributed profit of privately
owned corporations.
11. These series refer to pre-tax, pre-transfer inequality. Post-tax, post-transfer series (in progress)
are likely to reinforce these conclusions, at least regarding the US-France comparison.
12. We refer to the country-specific papers for detailed discussions: Saez and Zucman, 2016;
Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli, 2017, 2018; Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty, 2016; Piketty,
Yang and Zucman, 2017.

References
Alvaredo, F., A.B. Atkinson and S. Morelli (2018), “Top wealth shares in the UK over more than a
century”, forthcoming, The Journal of Public Economics.
Alvaredo, F., A.B. Atkinson and S. Morelli (2017), “Top wealth shares in the UK over more than a
century”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 11759.
Alvaredo, F. et al. (2017), “Global inequality dynamics: New findings from WID.world”, The American
Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, Vol. 107(5), pp. 404-409.
Alvaredo, F. et al. (2016), “Distributional National Accounts (DINA) guidelines: Concepts and methods
used in the World Wealth and Income Database”, WID.world Working Paper, No. 2016/2.
Alvaredo, F. et al. (2011-2015), The World Top Incomes Database, online between January 2011 and
December 2015.
Alvaredo, F. et al. (2013), “The top 1% in international and historical perspective”, The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 27(3), pp. 3-20.

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

160 │ 6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS
Atkinson, A.B. (2007), “Measuring top incomes: Methodological issues”, in Atkinson, A.B. and T.
Piketty (eds.), Top Incomes over the 20th Century: A Contrast Between Continental European and
English-Speaking Countries, Chapter 2, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 18-43.
Atkinson, A.B. (2005), “Top incomes in the U.K. over the 20th Century”, The Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, Vol. 168(2), pp. 325-43.
Atkinson, A.B. and A.J. Harrison (1978), Distribution of Personal Wealth in Britain, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Atkinson, A.B. and T. Piketty (2010), Top Incomes. A Global Perspective, Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Atkinson, A.B. and T. Piketty (2007), Top Incomes over the 20th Century. A Contrast Between
Continental European and English-Speaking Countries, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Atkinson, A.B., T. Piketty and E. Saez (2011), “Top incomes in the long-run of history”, The Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 49(1), pp. 3-71.
Blanchet, T. and L. Chancel (2016), “National Accounts series methodology”, WID.world Working
Paper, No. 2016/1.
Blanchet, T., J. Fournier and T. Piketty (2017), “Generalized Pareto Curves: Theory and applications to
income and wealth tax data for France and the United States, 1800-2014”, WID.world Working
Paper, No. 2017/3.
Bourguignon, F. (2015), “Appraising income inequality databases in Latin America”, The Journal of
Economic Inequality, Vol. 13(4), pp. 557-578.
Deaton, A. (2005), “Measuring poverty in a growing world (or Measuring growth in a poor world)”, The
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87(1), pp. 1-19.
Fesseau, M. and M. Mattonetti (2013), “Distributional measures across household groups in a national
accounts framework: Results from an experimental cross-country exercise on household income,
consumption and saving”, OECD Statistics Working Papers, No. 2013/04, OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k3wdjqr775f-en.
Frankel, S.H. and H. Herzfeld (1943), “European income distribution in the Union of South Africa and
the effect thereon of income taxation”, The South African Journal of Economics, Vol. 11(2), pp. 121136.
Garbinti, B., J. Goupille-Lebret and T. Piketty (2017), “Income inequality in France, 1900-2014:
Evidence from Distributional National Accounts (DINA)”, WID.world Working Paper, No. 2017/4.
Garbinti, B., J. Goupille-Lebret and T. Piketty (2016), “Accounting for wealth inequality dynamics:
Methods, estimates and simulations for France (1800-2014)”, WID.world Working Paper, No. 2016/5.
Kuznets, S. (1953), Shares Of Upper Income Groups In Income And Savings, The National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Nolan, B., M. Roser and S. Thewissen (2016), “GDP per capita versus median household income: What
gives rise to divergence over time?”, INET Oxford Working Paper, No. 2016-03.
Piketty, T. (2014), Capital in the 21st Century, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Piketty, T. (2003), “Income inequality in France, 1901-1998”, The Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 111, pp. 1004-1042.
Piketty, T. (2001), Les hauts revenus en France au 20e siècle : Inégalités et redistributions, 1901-1998,
Grasset, Paris.
FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018

6. DISTRIBUTIONAL NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

│ 161

Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2003), “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998”, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 118(1), pp. 1-39.
Piketty, T., E. Saez and S. Stantcheva (2014), “Optimal taxation of top labour incomes”, The American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 6(1), pp. 230-271.
Piketty, T., E. Saez, and G. Zucman (2016), “Distributional national accounts: Methods and estimates for
the United States”, NBER Working Paper, No. 22945.
Piketty, T., L. Yang and G. Zucman (2017), “Capital accumulation, private property and rising inequality
in China 1978-2015”, WID.world Working Paper, No. 2017/6.
Piketty, T. and G. Zucman (2014), “Capital is back: Wealth-income ratios in rich countries, 1700-2010”,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 129(3), pp. 1255-1310.
Saez, E. and G. Zucman (2016), “Wealth inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from
capitalized income tax data”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 131(2), pp. 519-578.
UNECE (2011), The Canberra Group Handbook on Household Income Statistics, Second Edition,
Geneva, United Nations,
www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/stats/groups/cgh/Canbera_Handbook_2011_WEB.pdf.
Zwijnenburg, J. (2016), “Further enhancing the work on household distributional data – Techniques for
bridging gaps between micro and macro results and nowcasting methodologies for compiling more
timely results”, Paper prepared for the 34th IARIW General Conference, Dresden.
Zwijnenburg, J., S. Bournot and F. Giovannelli (2017), “Expert group on disparities in a national
accounts framework: Results from the 2015 exercise”, OECD Statistics Working Papers,
No. 2016/10, OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/2daa921e-en.

FOR GOOD MEASURE: ADVANCING RESEARCH ON WELL-BEING METRICS BEYOND GDP © OECD 2018


