INTRODUCTION

The Four Musketeers

Too much and for too long, we seem to have surrendered personal excellence and
community values in the mere accumulation of material things. Our gross national product . . . counts the air pollution and cigarette advertising, and ambulances to clear our
highways of carnage. It counts special locks for our doors and the jails for the people who
break them. It counts the destruction of the redwoods and the loss of our natural wonders
in chaotic sprawl. It counts napalm and it counts nuclear warheads, and armored cars for
the police who ﬁght the riots in our streets. . . .
Yet the gross national product does not allow for the health of our children, the quality
of their education, or the joy of their play. It does not include the beauty of our poetry
or the strength of our marriages; the intelligence of our public debate or the integrity
of our public oﬃcials. It measures neither our wit nor our courage; neither our wisdom
nor our learning; neither our compassion nor our devotion to our country; it measures
everything, in short, except that which makes life worthwhile.
—Robert F. Kennedy Address, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, March 18, 19681
The valuable capacity of the human mind to simplify a complex situation in a compact characterization becomes dangerous when not controlled in terms of deﬁnitely
stated criteria. With quantitative measurements especially, the deﬁniteness of the result
suggests, often misleadingly, a precision and simplicity in the outlines of the object
measured. Measurements of national income are subject to this type of illusion and
resulting abuse, especially since they deal with matters that are the center of conﬂict of
opposing social groups where the eﬀectiveness of an argument is often contingent upon
oversimpliﬁcation.
—Simon Kuznets, in National Income 1929–1932. A report to the U.S. Senate, 73rd
Congress, 2nd Session. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Oﬃce, 1934 (p. 5–6)2

1. The speech can be listened to at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=77IdKFqXbUY.
2. The quote is taken from Costanza et al. (2009, p. 8).
( xi )

( xii )

A

Introduction: The Four Musketeers

lthough the economist does not have the politician’s ﬂamboyant style,
these two quotations show that the common use of GDP or GNP as
the main indicator of social progress and countries’ success over the last
decades has been, early on, warned against by its creator and by prominent
decision-makers. But even if economists cannot be accused of overselling
the GDP, they should perhaps feel a special responsibility for helping to
construct better alternatives.
This is the perspective from which this book is written. This does not
mean that we believe that economic theory provides a ready-to-go alternative indicator. The design of good indicators of social performance should
ideally be the collective endeavor of social scientists from many disciplines,
and should rely on the views of the populations whose well-being is to be
measured. First of all, it involves addressing hard ethical issues about distributive justice. The evaluation of individual situations and social states
of aﬀairs requires deﬁning what should be distributed between the members of society (subjective well-being, resources, opportunities . . . ), and
how it should be distributed, that is, how much priority should be given
to the worst-oﬀ. These two sets of issues articulate social evaluation and
interpersonal comparisons, two famously diﬃcult value-laden exercises.
While the diﬃcult ethical issues cannot be answered once and for all and
cannot be answered with the scientiﬁc authority of the standard corpus
of economics and other social sciences, it is important to recognize that
there are concepts and theories that do shape the questions in a remarkably helpful and clarifying way. And it so happens that welfare concepts
have been developed by economists, sometimes in relation to moral and
political philosophy, because of their role as advisors in the assessment
of economic and social policy. In a nutshell, while the economist cannot
answer the ethical questions, “welfare economics”, a subﬁeld of economic
theory that we broadly construe as encompassing social choice theory and
the theory of fair allocation as well as more traditional ﬁelds such as costbeneﬁt analysis, now provides a useful array of concepts that help formulate
such questions. We would therefore like this book to help economists, social
scientists, decision-makers, and interested persons to better identify the
pros and cons of various approaches and their ethical underpinnings.
Obviously, we do not have to start from scratch, as a whole industry
has set out to produce alternative indicators, following an exponential
growth curve over the last three decades (as described by Gadrey and
Jany-Catrice 2006). Our goal is to provide a critical examination of the
main approaches. We have identiﬁed four approaches (the “four musketeers”) that seek to ﬁght the power of GDP, although, for reasons to be
explained shortly, one should perhaps distinguish ﬁve approaches. The ﬁrst
approach proposes to gather various indicators of social performance into

Introduction: The Four Musketeers

( xiii )

a hybrid, composite index, in which GDP per capita or total household
income generally is one component among others such as unemployment,
health, and poverty. The Human Development Index, regularly published
for international comparisons since UNDP (1990), and recently revisited in
UNDP (2010), is the most famous of such indicators. This approach is perhaps the simplest because it does not rely on sophisticated theory—this
provides a key advantage in terms of potential popularity. It is discussed
most speciﬁcally in chapter 1 of this book.
Chapter 2 is devoted to the speciﬁc issue of sustainability. While this
is not exactly the same issue as measuring the well-being of the present
generation, it has been quite natural for the inventors of alternative indicators to think of the hazards to future generations induced by unfettered
economic growth. “Greening” GDP, or measuring the ecological “footprint”
of the present generation, has become a fashionable approach in this context. This chapter therefore deals with an important aspect of the problem
of going beyond GDP. It also provides a nice transition between the composite approaches discussed in chapter 1 and the monetary approaches
examined in chapter 3, because various sustainability indicators have been
constructed following the composite and the monetary methodologies.
The monetary approaches, as the name clearly suggests, keep the monetary metric of the GDP but seek to change the contents. A pioneering
initiative in this vein has been made by Nordhaus and Tobin (1972).
The monetary approaches are at the extreme opposite of the composite approaches insofar as they are most demanding in terms of economic
theory background. We will therefore devote two chapters (chapters 3–
4) to them. As we will explain in these chapters, there is an important
distinction between the approaches that seek to put a uniform price on
each dimension of well-being that GDP does not cover (or wrongly covers), and the approaches that use the monetary metric through individual
willingness-to-pay and “equivalent income,” allowing diﬀerent values for
diﬀerent people. The latter oﬀer much more ﬂexibility, receive much better
support from basic principles, and are even able to go beyond the money
metric itself in order to refer to generalized opportunity sets rather than
ordinary market-like budget sets. A separate discussion in two chapters
appeared therefore necessary. In chapter 3 we explain the limits of the
former approach (uniform pricing), but also discuss the more promising
idea of keeping a role for total income as a component of an index of
social welfare. The latter approach (equivalent income) is studied in detail
in chapter 4, with a review of the criticisms it has been subjected to after it
was ﬁrst used in the late 1970s and early 1980s. We will argue that these
criticisms are not insurmountable, so that the approach remains actually
quite valuable.

( xiv )

Introduction: The Four Musketeers

The third approach discussed in this book involves direct measures of
subjective well-being. Interest in this approach has soared in the last 20
years, mostly drawn by the development of happiness data and the application of econometric techniques to them. For an economist it is quite
a revolution, in view of the long skepticism about such measures in the
discipline in most of the twentieth century. In Chapter 5 we analyze the
ethical underpinnings of subjective well-being indicators, their connections
to psychological and philosophical background theories, their relation to
economic concepts, and also the empirical strategies for possible improvements to data collection. The key issues discussed in that chapter have to
do with the practical and ethical problem of comparing subjective declarations across individuals in order to estimate the distribution of well-being
in a given population. Subjective well-being data are often believed to provide a direct measure of well-being, or at least a good proxy, but things are
not so simple. There is a real danger that they are signiﬁcantly misleading.
The fourth approach, dealt with in chapter 6, is Amartya Sen’s capability
approach, which has also become considerably attractive to many scholars
and activists after it was ﬁrst formulated in the mid-1980s (Sen 1985).
Although the approach is often associated with the Human Development
Index, this index is, due to data limitations for wide international comparisons, a pale reﬂection of the general and ambitious methodology proposed
by the capability perspective. It is especially interesting to discuss this
approach, not as a radically diﬀerent view, but as a methodology that relates
in complex ways to the approaches discussed in the preceding chapters.
Although it is sometimes described as mainly focused on objective dimensions of life, it actually makes room for subjective aspects of well-being, but
not as much as the equivalent income approach of chapter 4 and the subjective well-being approach of chapter 5 do. This, however, remains a matter
for discussion, as the ambition to respect the values and preferences of the
population whose well-being is to be measured is widely shared among the
approaches described in this book.
To a substantial extent, the ideal of respecting the population’s values
and preferences provides the thread of the book, as each approach rebels
against GDP for its failure to live by that ideal, and each approach tries to
incorporate new elements that go in that direction. We will show in this
book that the various approaches unequally succeed in capturing the population’s values and preferences. Our conclusion will be that most if not
all of these approaches deserve to be pursued, but some of them must
acknowledge that they involve a substantial degree of paternalism and perfectionism, more than their advocates typically admit. While the obsession
with GDP puts “the mere accumulation of material things” above “personal

Introduction: The Four Musketeers

( xv )

excellence and community values” (Kennedy), many of the alternative indicators are not more neutral and promote other values, such as good feelings
or particular freedoms. Among the approaches examined in this book, the
equivalent income will be shown to be the most respectful of people’s goals
in life—which is an advantage over the other approaches only if people’s
goals are respectable!
The authors of this book have been involved in the works of the StiglitzSen-Fitoussi Commission,3 whose mandate was to reconcile the diverging
outlooks provided by standard indicators and by the perceptions of the population. The report of the Commission identiﬁes various areas in which
more eﬀort should be made by statistical institutions and those who use
the data. These include in particular the three approaches discussed in
our chapters 4, 5, and 6, as well as the sustainability issues analyzed in
chapter 2.
This book is built upon some of the work that has been done by
the authors for the Commission, some of which has been published or
made available on the Commission or INSEE websites (Fleurbaey 2009;
Afsa et al. 2008; Blanchet, Le Cacheux, and Marcus 2009). While survey papers and committee reports provide essential elements, they often
remain superﬁcial on the technical aspects and the ethical ramiﬁcations.
With this book, we seek to provide additional material for those who would
like to go further and better understand the issues and the possible solutions. The problem of designing a good indicator of social progress is a
tremendous opportunity to connect various areas of economics and other
social sciences and is a great source of inspiration given the number and
scope of debates and questions that remain open to this day.
Surveys and reports also obey certain rules of restraint and balance,
whereas a book like this one is a better place to explore original ideas. While
we sought to remain comprehensive, we have not hesitated to adopt a critical tone and a more personal perspective in the assessment of the various
arguments and approaches, and to propose new ideas and new articulations
of the various approaches.
The book is written for readers who are already familiar with the main
concepts and issues rather than for readers who seek an easy introduction
to the topic. But most of the text is written so as to be widely accessible
to readers with an undergraduate background in economics. It should also
be accessible to motivated readers with a mere elementary background in
calculus, because the technical concepts from economic theory are always
3. Details about the Commission, including its downloadable report, can be found at
www.stiglitz-sen-ﬁtoussi.fr.

( xvi )

Introduction: The Four Musketeers

deﬁned and introduced when they are used in the argument. This is not a
textbook, and the text contains few formal results; it focuses on the ideas
and arguments in the quest for alternative indicators.
In terms of technical diﬃculty, chapter 3 is the most demanding, but
because it is mostly critical of the use of pricing in monetary indicators, it
is also the least necessary to grasp the main messages of the book, so that it
can be skipped by the reader without losing much. Note, however, that this
chapter contains a constructive part, dealing with the question of writing
a formula for social welfare as a function of eﬃciency and equity components, in which total income could appear as an element among others.
Chapter 2 on sustainability can also be skipped without losing the thread
in the other chapters, but obviously this does not mean that sustainability
issues are less important. A reader who is especially interested in happiness
or capabilities can start with chapter 5 or 6 and look at the other chapters
when references are made to them.
Acknowledgments In the preparation of this book, we have beneﬁted a lot
from interactions and collaboration with many colleagues, in particular in
the Stiglitz-Sen-Fitoussi Commission, which was a very stimulating experience. Our coauthors in earlier work dealing with the topics discussed here
have been very inﬂuential and inspiring, although any responsibility for
the shortcomings of this text should not be attributed to them. Various
parts of the manuscript have greatly beneﬁted from detailed comments,
for which we are very grateful, by Angus Deaton, Koen Decancq, Juan
Moreno-Ternero, Erik Schokkaert, and Giacomo Valletta. Reactions from
the audience at an Urrutia-Erejalde summer school session in 2012 have
also been helpful. Discussions with Geir Asheim, Larry Pervin, and Justin
Wolfers are also gratefully acknowledged. Joe Jackson, Terry Vaughn, and
the editorial team at Oxford University Press have been steadily helpful,
eﬃcient, and encouraging. Last but not least, our families deserve our
warmest gratitude for their wonderful support during the long months of
preparation of the manuscript.

CHAPTER 1

A Wealth of Indicators

1.1 INTRODUCTION

I

n this ﬁrst chapter, we provide an introductory overview of the alternative indicators that are already available and recall the institutional
and historical context in which they have been produced. This introduction sets the stage for the analysis of the foundations and possible future
developments to which the bulk of this book is devoted.
A detailed and exhaustive review would, however, be impossible in
a single chapter. Building alternatives to GDP is a not-so-recent industry. It started at the onset of the 1970s, and it enjoyed an exceptional
boom over the last decade, fueled by both supply and demand factors.
On the supply side one has the increasing availability of international
data of all kinds that constitute this industry’s raw material. On the
demand side one witnesses the mounting dissatisfaction of citizens with
the image of society returned by oﬃcial statistics, calling for alternative numbers. The conﬂuence of these two trends beneﬁted from modern
instruments of dissemination: it is now easy to post new proposals and
make them accessible to a large worldwide community, sometimes bypassing the lengthy circuits of academic or technical validation. To get a feeling
of how the resulting activity is burgeoning and heterogeneous, one just has
to visit some dedicated websites, and inter alia the “wikiprogress” platform
(http://www.wikiprogress.org), which is the main window of the “Global
Project on Measuring the Progress of Societies,” a federative project hosted
by OECD, supported by several international organizations, and opened to
all forms of initiatives, oﬃcial or nonoﬃcial. A glance at this site conﬁrms

(1)

(2)

A Wealth of Indicators

the diﬃculty of an exhaustive presentation. Even if exhaustiveness was at
hand, the proposed picture would rapidly turn obsolete.
Our ambition here remains therefore more limited. It is to give a basic
idea of the main currents of thought that structure this ﬁeld: Where
do they come from? How do they relate to one another? What are
their most emblematic representatives? What questions do they raise? To
this aim, one strongly beneﬁts from reference surveys that are already
available (Boarini, Johansson, and Mira d’Ercole 2006; Gadrey and JanyCatrice 2006) and to which the reader can refer for further details.1
Presenting the background of available indicators will enable us to raise
and take a ﬁrst look at key methodological questions that will run throughout this book. While the shortcomings of GDP are widely acknowledged,
there are vivid debates about how to enrich the available information about
social welfare. Two issues are particularly salient. First, there is the issue
of how far from GDP one should seek to go. Modest corrections to GDP
are possible, but adopting a radically new index based on totally diﬀerent
data, for example, an index of national happiness, is also advocated by some
authors. In this vein, monetary approaches are often opposed to nonmonetary approaches, an important criticism against the former being that they
too easily substitute one dimension of performance for another.
The other important debate is whether one should seek a single alternative to GDP or retain a multidimensional approach, with several indicators for diﬀerent dimensions (GDP remaining possibly one of them).
Aggregation has its advocates and its opponents, with theoretical and pragmatic arguments being invoked on the two sides of the debate. Elements of
these debates will appear in this chapter and will motivate many parts of
the book.

1.2 A BIRD’S-EYE VIEW
Let us start with a very synthetic overview, oﬀered by ﬁgure 1.1. It tentatively orders approaches or initiatives by approximate time of apparition
(on the horizontal axis) and by degree of proximity with GDP or other
concepts of national accounts (along the vertical axis). A distinction is
also made between indexes (gray boxes) and other elements of interest
(white boxes). “Indexes” include both one-shot prototypes and indicators
that have been more or less regularly produced and generally go on being
1. Vanoli’s history of national accounts also oﬀers many very informed insights on
this literature, from a national accountant’s point of view (Vanoli 2005).

1960

1970

Subjective
approaches

1980

1990

2000
Happiness data

Easterlin (1974)

Human Development
Index (HDI)

Composite or
hybrid
indexes

Happy Life
Index (HLI)

Social
accounts

Nordhaus
and Tobin
(MEW and
SMEW)

Capital-based
approach to
sustainability

Global project on measuring
the progress of societies
(OECD and other institutions)
GDP and
Beyond (UE)

Millennium Development
Goals (UN)

System of integrated environmental
and economic accounting (UN)
- Index of Sustainable
Economic Welfare (ISEW)
- Genuine Progress
Indicator (GPI)

Happy Planet
Index (HPI)

Ecological Footprint (EF)

Dashboards of
sustainable development
(UN, EU and national
declinations)

SSF
report

Sponsorship
group (ESSC)

TFSD (UNECE/
Eurostat/OECD)

WGSSD (UNECE/
Eurostat/OCDE)

Green GDPs
Genuine savings

Your Better
Life Index
(OECD)

Adjusted Net Savings
(World Bank)

Equivalent
income
approaches

Notes: Gray boxes correspond to indexes or sets of indexes, including both one-shot prototypes and those that have benefited from some regular production. White boxes correspond to all other forms of
related initiatives: reports, task forces, more or less structured research or production programs. Italics refer to indexes or initiatives excusively focussed on sustainability. Datations are very indicative. Arrows
outline the main dependencies or filiations.
Non usual acronyms: UNECE = United Nations Economic Commission for Europe; ESSC = European Statistical System Committee, WGSSD = Working Group on Statistics for Sustainable Development,
TFSD = Task Force for Measuring Sustainable Development, SSF = Stiglitz-Sen-Fitoussi report.

Figure 1.1
Alternatives to GDP : a bird’s-eye view

(3)

Accounting/
monetary
approaches

"Social
indicators"
movement

Agenda 21
(UN)

Happy Income
Index (HII)

1 . 2 A B I R D ’S - E Y E V I E W

Brundtland
report

Sustainable Society
Index (SSI)

Environmental
Performance Index (EPI)

Index of Social Health (ISH)
Index of Economic Well-being (IEWB)

Dashboards

2010

(4)

A Wealth of Indicators

so. The “other” category includes seminal papers, reports, working groups,
formal or informal research programs, and so on. We also tried to represent
some of the ﬁliations linking these items to each other, but only the most
important or speciﬁc ones. In some cases, links are so numerous that they
could not be displayed. This is generally the case with federative projects
that generally borrow from all preexisting trends or material.
The time origin that has been retained is 1960. It is surely not at this
time that limits to GDP (or GNP) started being discovered. They had been
already known for a long time. Some of them had been warned about as
soon as concepts of national accounts started being coined and implemented during the 1940s. Yet the necessity of correcting or complementing
GDP had no reason to strongly emerge before it had acquired its dominant
position, that is, in the middle of the big expansion that followed World
War II.
The ﬁrst route opened at this time was on the social side. In parallel with the development and harmonization of national accounts as one
of their core activities, National Statistical Organizations (NSOs) started
extending the ﬁeld of social statistics, mostly relying on household surveys covering the main aspects of people’s living conditions: labor market
outcomes, health, and so forth. The idea of integrating these social statistics into a fully integrated system of “social accounts” was pushed forward
during the 1970s (Stone 1975) but failed to be applied at this stage. The
reason is probably that this ﬁeld is less prone to rigorous integration than
stocks and ﬂows of resources measured in monetary terms. But a current
of thought had emerged, and it temporarily materialized during the 1960s
for the regrouping of such statistics within sets of “social indicators,” aiming at counterbalancing the increasing preeminence of GDP. In addition to
various national initiatives,2 the OECD launched an ambitious statistical
program of such social indicators during the 1970s. Interest in this way of
promoting social data then partially faded away, but the impulsion that had
been given to statistical production remained, and more recent initiatives
naturally draw upon the implicit legacy of this early movement.

2. For a history of this movement, see in particular Cobb and Rixford 1998. In the
United States, regular reporting of social indicators received strong support under the
Johnson administration and was then progressively abandoned during the 1970s. To
take the French case as another example, interest in this question was strong at the end
of the 1960s and contributed to improving the coverage and quality of social statistics, as well as developing the system of satellite accounts. But the idea of a regular
and standardized reporting of such indicators progressively lost support during the
1970s, in parallel with the progressive decline of the French planiﬁcation system (see
Perret 2002).

1 . 2 A B I R D ’S - E Y E V I E W

(5)

It is about the same period that another step was taken, along another
direction, with the publication of the seminal work by Nordhaus and
Tobin (1972). This publication represented the ﬁrst noticeable eﬀort to correct GDP “from the inside,” that is, in a consistent accounting framework,
combining a social dimension with a partial account of environmental
issues. This publication took place in a context of emerging concern for
the ﬁniteness of the resources upon which the rapid growth of post-World
War II decades had been built. This concern had been spurred by the publication of the ﬁrst edition of the “limits to growth” report by the Club of
Rome (Meadows et al. 1972).
Here also, a period of reﬂux followed, however, interest in these questions turning paradoxically weaker after the ﬁrst oil shock. Slow economic
growth and its social consequences restored prominence to policies aiming at stimulating activity, and to GDP as the main monitoring tool. But
this did not completely interrupt the quest for alternatives to GDP. The
Nordhaus and Tobin endeavor had several successors still trying to make
GDP closer to well-being by subtracting from it all that does not contribute to welfare and trying to reaggregate to it things that do and that
are not usually captured in monetary accounts: the Index of Sustainable
Economic Welfare (ISEW)3 and the Genuine Progress Indicator (GPI) are
examples that we shall brieﬂy present later. More recently, indirect descendants of the Nordhaus and Tobin tradition are attempts to built corrected
GDPs through the equivalent income approach that will be reviewed more
extensively in chapter 4.
However, another very dominant strand of the literature considers that
monetary valuation is inadequate for most of the components of wellbeing that do not spontaneously come out in monetary terms. It adopts a
much simpler and more radical way of aggregating heterogenous information, the methodology of composite indexes. This methology of composite
indexes is used in several domains. It is often used when one wishes to summarize complex phenomena measured in heterogeneous ways, sometimes
even purely qualitative. There are composite indexes for the performance
of countries in many ﬁelds: labor or product market regulation, friendliness
to business activities, individual freedom, and so on. The global measurement of progress and human well-being is one of the domains where this
practice is the most developed, with the emblematic example of the Human

3. Bibliographical references will not be systematically provided for all the quoted
indexes. Links to the relevant information can generally be retrieved through the
Wikiprogress platform.

(6)

A Wealth of Indicators

Development Index (HDI). Some of the other examples of this kind mentioned in the upper half of ﬁgure 1.1 are the Index of Economic Well-Being
(IEWB), the Social Sustainability Index (SSI), and, still more recent, the
Better Life Index launched in 2011 by the OECD.
Four other points complete the picture provided by ﬁgure 1.1: indexes
exclusively devoted to sustainability, the “dashboard” approach, subjective
approaches to well-being, and a bunch of recent federative initiatives, often
interacting or overlapping, that have developed over the very last years.
Concerning sustainability, we mentioned how oil shocks had the paradoxical eﬀect of helping preserve a leading role for GDP. But concern for
ecological constraints never disappeared and has now fully reemerged at
the forefront of public preoccupations. This explains why the term “sustainable” appears in so many “generalist” composite indexes. It explains the
eﬀorts made by statisticians to elaborate a common System of Integrated
Environmental and Economic Accounts (SIEEA), under the auspices of the
United Nations, including some attempts to develop a “green GDP.” And
it has also led to the development of indexes more exclusively devoted
to this sustainability issue: either essentially along the environmental
dimension, such as the Ecological Footprint (EF) or the Environmental
Sustainability Index (ESI), or in a more comprehensive perspective encompassing all the potential determinants of future well-being, the successive
concepts of Genuine Savings (GS) or Adjusted Net Savings (ANS), the latter now implemented and regularly published by the World Bank (World
Bank 2011).
This concern for sustainability and development naturally beneﬁted
from the impetus given by the publication of the very inﬂuential Brundtland report (Brundtland 1987) and the Rio summit (in 1992), whose
twentieth anniversary has been very recently celebrated. The results of this
new “Rio + 20” summit have been often judged disappointing in terms
of political action, but it reaﬃrmed the need for “broader measures of
progress to complement GDP” (ﬁnal declaration, point 38). Now, more than
the production of monodimensional indicators of the EF or ANS types,
the impulse given by the Brundtland report has above all led to the development of a large variety of “dashboards,” that is, sets of indicators that
bring us back to the initial idea of the “social indicators” movement of the
1960s, but strongly reinforced on the environmental side. Alongside “dashboards of sustainable development” that exist in various forms and for
various geographical levels, our diagram mentions the set of Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) adopted by the United Nations in 2000
(http://www.unmillenniumproject.org/goals/gti.htm). Such “dashboard”
approaches are both diametrically opposed and fully complementary to

1 . 2 A B I R D ’S - E Y E V I E W

(7)

the strategy of building composite indicators. This complementarity is
two-sided. There is always an implicit dashboard behind any composite
indicator, made of all its distinct components, and, symmetrically, it is
often very tempting and relatively easy to try to summarize a dashboard by
building an associated headline composite indicator that will help drawing
public attention onto this dashboard.
Subjective approaches are an additional way of measuring well-being,
here represented as an outsider on the upper side of the diagram, but
indeed one that has counted and that has been intensively discussed over
the last decade. It consists in directly measuring individual well-being
through answers to questions about how people perceive their lives. This
approach has a long tradition too. The seminal contribution to this literature has been roughly concomitant with the publication by Nordhaus
and Tobin. It is in the middle of the 1970s that Easterlin formulated his
well-known paradox (Easterlin 1974), pointing at the apparent lack of connexion between material progress measured by GDP and the ﬂat trend for
perceived well-being, as revealed by subjective data. Renewed interest in
this result some 10-15 years ago has led to a considerable literature upon
which chapter 5 will comment at length.
Subjective data can result in indexes that exclusively rely on them, one
example being the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index, not reported in
the graph but accessible through the Wikiprogress platform. This index
goes to the point of oﬀering a daily follow-up of Americans’ health and
well-being. Or subjective data can enter the composition of composite or
hybrid indexes. Such is —marginally— the case for OECD’s Your Better
Life Index and much more substantially for the Happy Life Expectancy
(HLE) index (Veenhoven 1996), which combines a subjective happiness
measure with life expectancy; for the Happy Income (HI) index (Prinz
and Bünger 2009), which combines the same kind of subjective measure
with equivalent household income; and the HPI index, which divides the
HLE by the Ecological Footprint with the objective of distinguishing those
countries that can oﬀer long happy lives with minimal pressure on the
earth’s resources. This latter example shows how the index-building industry can occasionally use already existing indexes as intermediate products
for new ones, a possibility that can also contribute to the accumulation of
competing measures.
Finally, ﬁgure 1.1 also tries to make some room for more or less recent
federative initiatives, some of which are still under way. This includes the
already mentioned program on “measuring the well-being and progress
of societies” that has recently given birth to the “better life” initiative
launched by OECD for its ﬁftieth anniversary. The Your Better Life Index

(8)

A Wealth of Indicators

quoted above, as the most recent of composite indicators, is a headline product of this initiative. Also worth noticing are a joint working
group on “statistics for sustained development” (WGSSD) involving the
OECD, the European statistical Agency (Eurostat), and the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE/OECD/Eurostat 2008), the
“GDP and beyond” communication by the European Commission in 2009
(Commission of the European Communities 2009), and the concomitant
report of the Commission on Measuring Economic Performance and Social
Progress (Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi 2009). These three operations, which
delivered their ﬁnal reports roughly at the same period, have, in turn, given
birth to two still ongoing task forces: a sponsorship group of the European
Statistical System Committee (ESSC) and a new OECD/Eurostat/UNECE
task force for measuring statistical development (TFSD) that can be viewed
as a phase 2 of the former WGSSD working group.
From this ﬁrst overview, one clearly sees that the problem with challenging GDP is not the lack of competitors, but rather their multiplicity.
We shall now look more precisely into the details of some of these options.
This closer look will suggest some reasons why, at this stage, none of them
has been able to receive the global support that would have imposed it as
the deﬁnite challenger to GDP. Leaving the speciﬁc case of purely subjective
approaches for chapter 5, we shall do it under four main categories that
rather naturally emerge from ﬁgure 1.1: (a) composite indicators of the HDI
type, (b) monetary or quasi-monetary indicators of the “corrected GDP”
type in the Nordhaus and Tobin’s tradition, (c) synthetic sustainability
indicators, and (d) dashboards.

1.3 AGGREGATING THE NONAGGREGATABLE?
We begin with composite indicators not because of their anteriority—they
started expending much after the Nordhaus and Tobin contribution—but
because of their greater conceptual simplicity. The Human Development
Index (HDI) has a prominent position within this category, due to its worldwide geographical coverage and the fact of being produced by a United
Nations institution, the United Nations Development Program (UNDP).
Since its creation, in 1990, it has constituted a central piece of the Human
Development Report published yearly by the UNDP. It has been recently
“reformed” for its twentieth anniversary in 2010.
The HDI is a composite index mixing economic resources with two other
dimensions, health and educational achievement, regarded as two major
ingredients of development and progress. All three components are said

1 . 3 AG G R E G AT I N G T H E N ON AG G R E G ATA B L E ?

(9)

to be given equal weight in the index, with a calibration methodology
ensuring a [0,1] range of variation. Health outcomes are measured by life
expectancy at birth, in years. Income was proxied by GDP per capita in the
initial version of the index, replaced by Gross National Income (GNI) in
the new one, the diﬀerence being that GNI excludes income that is produced within the country but that beneﬁts residents of other countries,
such as returns on capital owned by foreign investors. Using GNI instead
of GDP is indeed more adequate for countries where a large share of production does not beneﬁt the local population due to the high penetration
of foreign investment. Concerning educational achievement, it was measured in the 1990–2009 version of the index by combining two statistics:
the adult literacy rate, and the combined primary, secondary, and tertiary
gross enrollment ratios. These two components have been replaced in 2010
by the mean years of schooling of people that have passed schooling ages
(years that a 25-year-old person or older has spent in schools), and the
expected years of schooling for individuals entering the schooling system,
(i.e. the years that a ﬁve-year-old child will spend with his education in his
whole life).
The HDI index leads to country rankings that indeed diﬀer from those
based on GDP. According to the 2011 edition, the country with the highest
HDI is Norway, with a value of 0.943. This country also ranks high in terms
of GDP per capita, but only in the ﬁfth position, with a level quite far below
the two GDP champions, Qatar and Luxembourg, which rank respectively
37th and 25th in terms of HDI. The most extreme case of reranking in the
2011 edition is Equatorial Guinea, which loses 90 places when moving from
the GDP hierarchy to the HDI hierarchy. At the same time, as displayed on
ﬁgure 1.2, HDI and GDP remain relatively well correlated, this being due
both to the fact that GDP or the related concept of GNI enters the index,
and to the fact that the other components of the index are themselves
related, albeit in a non linear fashion, to GDP. Over its 20 years of existence, the basic HDI has been complemented by associated indexes such as
the inequality-adjusted HDI or the gender inequality index, but keeping the
spirit of aggregating no more than four or ﬁve elementary components.
Some of the other indexes that were mentioned on ﬁgure 1.1 are less
parsimonious than the HDI or its variants in terms of number of elementary components, but are generally so because they have been developed
for a smaller number of countries, and sometimes only for a single country.
Among them, the ISH, applied to the United States (Miringoﬀ, Miringoﬀ, and Opdyke 1999), is based on 16 social indicators, grouped by age.
The Index of Economic Well-Being (IEWB), developed by L. Osberg and
A. Sharpe (2002), covers current prosperity (mainly based on measures of

A Wealth of Indicators

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Human Development Index

1.0

( 10 )

0

20000

40000

60000

80000

Per Capita GDP (in 2005 constant US $)

Figure 1.2
HDI versus GDP (2007 values)
Source: UNDP (2011).

consumption), wealth stocks (including natural and immaterial resources),
equality, and economic security. These four broad dimensions are each fed
by two to six subindexes. As an example, economic security is captured
through four social risks: unemployment, illness, single parent poverty,
and old-age poverty. Among the countries considered, Norway is the country that has experienced the most rapid progression from 1980 to 1999,
while slow growth or even declines have been registered for Sweden, the
United States, and the UK, despite signiﬁcant GDP growth for the last two
countries. Results are, however, partly sensitive to the choice of weighting
factors. The index has been applied to some other countries. For instance,
Jany-Catrice and Kampelmann (2007) revised the Index of Economic WellBeing (IEWB) for France with enhanced data over a larger time period.
Their results conﬁrm the divergence between GDP and IEWB since the end
of the 1980s, largely due to the lack of improvement in inequality reduction
and economic security.
The Social Sustainability Index (SSI) is also an index that aggregates
a relatively large number of items (24) covering the three pillars of the
Brundtlandian deﬁnition of sustainable development (van de Kerk and
Manuel 2008). On the contrary, three other examples that appear in
ﬁgure 1.1, and whose formulas have been already given, the HLE, the HI,
and the HPI, have gone back to much simpler compositions, combining subjective well-being with either one or two additional dimensions such as life

1 . 3 AG G R E G AT I N G T H E N ON AG G R E G ATA B L E ?

( 11 )

expectancy, income, and the Ecological Footprint. Subjective data have also
been included in the OECD’s Your Better Life Index but the dimensionality
of the index is comparable to that of the IEWB or the SSI, since the subjective dimension is combined with a list of 10 more objective dimensions,
each of which represented by one to three statistics: income and wealth,
jobs and earnings, housing, work and life balance, health status, educations and skills, social connections, civic engagement and governance,
environmental quality, personal security. All the 11 resulting dimensions,
by default, are equally weighted, but a main innovation of the index is to
allow testing any alternative set of weights, and see the implied changes
in rankings for the 34 OECD countries covered by the index, thanks to an
online interactive application.
Whatever the number of underlying dimensions and the resulting messages, what are the main problems with this approach? The methodology
of composite indexes is not speciﬁc to the measurement of well-being, and,
whatever the domain to which it is applied, it attracts the same criticisms
concerning its lack of analytical foundations (Ravallion 2010a). The OECD
has attempted a systematic examination of these limits, to help prevent
excessively misleading uses of this methodology (OECD/JRC 2008).
The questions that most immediately come to mind have to do with the
methodogy of aggregation and the prior treatments applied to the components.4 In the case of monetary indexes such as GDP, aggregation relies on
the hypothesis that market prices more or less convey information about
the way people value the elementary physical quantities that the index
intends to synthetize. As will be shown in chapter 3, this hypothesis is,
in fact, much less grounded than one could have believed, but it provides
the feeling of aggregating things on the basis of something that is not fully
arbitrary.
As soon as one leaves the ﬁeld of monetary aggregates, this problem
of arbitrariness becomes much more pressing, with few guidelines about
how it can be managed. We shall insist here on the example of the HDI,
not because it is particularly illustrative of what to do or not to do, but
because it is simple to handle and well known. Since its creation, the HDI
has simultaneously beneﬁted from a high international visibility and from
several critical assessments upon which it is possible to rely (Kelley 1991;

4. Another important question is data coverage or quality. It is not speciﬁc to the
methodology of composite indicators, but takes a particular importance for indexes
that generally try to cover large sets of countries with statistical systems that are very
unevenly developed. Imputation methodologies that are used to compensate the low
quality or the full absence of data cannot be neutral for the relevance of indicators.

( 12 )

A Wealth of Indicators

McGillivray 1991; Srinivasan 1994; Sagara and Najam 1998; MacGillivray
and White 2006; Ravallion 2010b).
The ﬁrst step of the HDI methodology consists in rescaling each
dimension with respect to a range of variation that is partly observed and
partly conventional. In the 2011 edition, minimum and maximum values
for life expectancy are set at 20 and 83.4 years respectively, the latter
value being the level of life expectancy reached in Japan. For a country
with an observed level of 60 years, the rescaled index of life expectancy
is (60 − 20)/(83.4 − 20) = 0.631. This value can be interpreted as an
index of relative deprivation along the life expectancy dimension, since it
means that a country with a value of 60 for its life expectancy is 63.1%
of the way between the worst and the best performance for this speciﬁc
dimension. For the two educational indexes, minimum values are set at 0
and maximum values are respectively 13.4 for the mean number of years of
schooling (the level observed in the Czech Republic in 2005) and an arbitrary 18 for the expected number of years of schooling. Concerning GNI
per capita, the maximum is the 107,721 level observed for Qatar in 2010,
with the minimum conventionally ﬁxed at 100—a very low value indeed
but accounting for the fact that, in countries close to this very low level,
a large part of subsistence also results from nonmonetary or unreported
income. This rescaling takes place after conversion to logarithms to reﬂect
the assumed decreasing eﬀect of GDP on well-being as GDP increases.
This is only one among various possible methodologies for all this
preliminary “preparation” of the elementary components of the index.
The other two main possibilities consist in standardizing variables, that
is, dividing them by their standard deviations after centering around their
means, or replacing values by ranks, and these choices are not neutral. For
instance, using ranks will downgrade the relative performance of a country
that is a strong outlier in terms of the component of interest, a property
that may seem desirable in some circumstances—especially when large
values are susceptible of resulting from measurement error—but not in
others.
Then comes the step of aggregation stricto sensu, again with various
possibilities. The initial version of the HDI used linear aggregation with
equal weights. This version has been criticized for the induced trade-oﬀs it
allowed between components of the index, in particular between income
and life expectancy. The new aggregation procedure has been presented
as oﬀering a more adequate treatment of this issue. But, according to
Ravallion (2010b) the claim that it succeeds in doing so is not warranted
at all. Let us examine the details brieﬂy, dropping the education dimension
that is orthogonal to this longevity/income trade-oﬀ. Using notations Y for

1 . 3 AG G R E G AT I N G T H E N ON AG G R E G ATA B L E ?

( 13 )

income and LE for life expectancy, the two successive versions of the index
boil down to
HDIold =

1 LE − LEmin
1 ln(Y) − ln(Ymin )
,
+
3 LEmax − LEmin 3 ln(Ymax ) − ln(Ymin )

and

HDInew =

LE − LEmin
LEmax − LEmin

1/3 

ln(Y) − ln(Ymin )
ln(Ymax ) − ln(Ymin )

1/3
.

In both cases, the implicit valuation of an additional year of life, VLE,
can be computed by equalizing to zero the global variation of the index
after joint marginal changes of Y and LE. The general formula will be
VLE = −


 


∂HDI
∂HDI
dY 
.
=
dLE HDI=constant
∂LE
∂Y

The application of this formula to the old and new versions of the index
leads to
VLEold = Y

ln(Ymax ) − ln (Ymin )
,
LEmax − LEmin

and
VLEnew = Y

ln(Y) − ln (Ymin )
.
LE − LEmin

The change appears nonnegligible, and its implications are not evident
at ﬁrst sight. In the ﬁrst version of the index, aggregation led to a marginal
valuation of life years that was linearly related to income. The new formula
makes the dependency much stronger, due to the new ln(Y) term on the
denominator, resulting in very low valuations of life years for countries
close to the minimum observed income level Ymin . According to Ravallion’s
computations, in the extreme case of Zimbabwe, one year of average life
expectancy is only worth $0.51 per person under the new version of the
index. In other words, if there had existed a policy allowing a $0.51 increase
in income per capita at the expense of a one year loss in average life
expectancy, this policy would have been judged as increasing this country’s
“human development.” Globally, the new index is found to have devalued
longevity compared to the older version, with only very few exceptions, and
it has done so much more intensively for poor countries. The ratio of the

( 14 )

A Wealth of Indicators

highest to the lowest VLEnew is 17,000. Even dropping the very extreme
case of Zimbabwe, this ratio is still 1,600.5
The paradox of such a situation is that a methodology initially developed, inter alia, to avoid the presumed arbitrariness of monetary aggregation ends up raising exactly similar problems, and possibly in aggravated
terms. Putting a money value on years of life has always generated understandable ethical reluctance, and one is tempted to welcome a composite
index that apparently avoids doing such things. But there is no miracle.
Aggregating GDP and life expectancy within one single scalar indicator
unavoidably amounts to giving an implicit value to additional years of life,
with the risk of doing so in a noncontrolled fashion. As argued by Ravallion,
the apparent transparency of the indicator is illusory. The indicator is only
transparent in the sense that it is easily replicable and amenable to the
kind of evaluation provided above. But as long as the user does not make
the eﬀort of performing such an analysis, the indicator remains completely
opaque concerning its true normative implications. And the problem does
not just arise because we have GDP or GNI as one of the components of
the index. The situation is not fundamentally diﬀerent when none of the
aggregated variables are monetary. Aggregation always implies assuming
some more or less important substitution possibilities between the items
that are aggregated.
Upstream from these problems comes the overarching question of the
choice of the items that are to be aggregated. The question is not only
“how to aggregate,” it is also to know “what to aggregate.” This is a stage
where some theory should also be welcome, even when it can be no more
than weak or very soft theory. The point is the need to be as clear as
possible concerning what exactly one wants to measure, and in what way
5. On a more positive side, aggregation through geometric means can have some
useful properties. Among other innovations of the revised HDI, one also ﬁnds the
“inequality adjusted HDI” (IHDI) that takes into account inequalities across dimensions. A frequent limit of corrections for inequality in composite indexes is that, when
aggregating subdimensions that have been separately corrected for inequality, cumulative deprivations are ignored, i.e., one neglects the fact that being relatively deprived
in terms of income generally goes along with relative deprivations in the other dimensions. The correct way to proceed is to ﬁrst compute individual indicators of well-being
(“individual HDIs”) combining the three dimensions for each individual, and then
aggregate them in a way that takes their inequality into account. In some sense, the
IHDI ultimately does this, because inequalities across each dimension are themselves
computed according to geometric means, and the order in which geometric means are
computed is neutral for the ﬁnal result. Thanks to such path independence, the IHDI
can be considered as using the correct form of aggregation, but it does so only under
the assumption that the geometric mean is the proper way to assess individual levels
of well-being, and that the geometric means also constitutes the proper way to correct
for inequality.

1 . 3 AG G R E G AT I N G T H E N ON AG G R E G ATA B L E ?

( 15 )

elementary components of the index will contribute to this global objective,
trying to avoid gaps and redundancies. When the objective is to measure
well-being, one needs a reasonable coverage of all that indeed matters for
well-being, and one must avoid combining elementary indices that measure
the same thing twice. To use once again the HDI as an example, its choice
of three main dimensions of well-being—monetary income, health, and
education—has been presented from the start as an empirical transcription of Sen’s concept of capabilities, discussed in chapter 6, that is, the fact
that well-being requires access to some basic entitlements over a selected
number of dimensions. But why restrict oneself to the three dimensions
chosen for the HDI, excluding, for instance, economic or personal security?
And what exactly means “adding” the health and education dimensions to
GDP? One can argue that health and education are dimensions that are
already incorporated in GDP, through levels of private and public expenditures devoted to these two items, and that the indicator may therefore
suﬀer from double counting. The answer could be that a diﬀerence has to
be made between expenditures on these two items and the results in terms
of actual health or access to education, but in that case, why not remove
the former from the index? An indicator whose aim is to measure a result
or an outcome—actual well-being—should not incorporate elements that
are only instruments for reaching this outcome.
This lack of analytical clarity concerning the divide between inputs,
intermediate products, and outputs is frequent in this ﬁeld. Incidentally,
GDP itself is not immune to this criticism: being a summation of valuesadded, it has the well-known merit of avoiding double counting of intermediate products that are ultimately included in ﬁnal consumption. However,
adding up consumption and investment, it unduly mixes something that
is undoubtedly a component of current well-being—consumption—and
something that should rather be viewed as an input to tomorrow’s wellbeing—investment. This point was taken into account by Nordhaus and
Tobin, and it will reappear later in our discussion of sustainability in
chapter 2.
Another good illustration of this “what to aggregate?” question is given
by the Happy Planet Index, which combines “Happy Life Expectancy” and
the Ecological Footprint. For someone who trusts subjective happiness
data to reveal the real quality of life, it seems to make sense to ﬁrst multiply the ﬂow of happiness by an indicator of how long this ﬂow will be
enjoyed by each individual. Yet, even at this stage, questions can be raised.
Are there good reasons for assuming a value of 1 for the elasticity of substitution between the two components: does 10% greater life expectancy
exactly compensate for 10% less of perceived happiness? It may also be

( 16 )

A Wealth of Indicators

that life expectancy is one of the elements that people already incorporate
in their assessment of how good their lives are, in which case a problem of
double counting appears again. But the most important problem is with the
division by the Ecological Footprint. There is no doubt that well-being and
sustainability are two important dimensions that deserve measurement,
but does this mean that it makes sense to integrate them at this point?
As it stands, the indicator may make no diﬀerence at all between a low
mortality / high footprint country and a high mortality / low footprint one.

1.4 CORRECTING GDP
To sum up, the problem raised by composite indexes is that, aiming at
avoiding the presumed arbitrariness of monetary aggregation, they end
up aggregating things in ways that are no less arbitrary, with uncontrolled
consequences for resulting trade-oﬀs between their diﬀerent items.
Of course, this does not suﬃce to prove that a well-deﬁned monetary aggregation is ultimately preferable to an ill-deﬁned or undeﬁned
“nonmonetary” aggregation. Nevertheless, many economists have trod the
road opened by Nordhaus and Tobin in 1972. The idea was to try to retain
as much as possible of the accounting consistency of the GNP or GDP
concepts, with the possibility of partly relying on other segments of the
very rich production of national accounts. This approach requires monetary
evaluations of all the elements that one wants to subtract from, or add to,
standard GDP. This approach can be labeled “corrected GDP” or “extended
accounts.”
The starting point by Nordhaus and Tobin was that the best option
for approaching welfare was not GDP itself, which is basically a measure
of economic activity, but rather one of its subcomponents, namely global
household consumption. Restarting from there, corrections proposed by
the two authors were made in two steps. The ﬁrst step derived a Measure
of Economic Welfare (MEW) by subtracting from total private consumption a number of components that do not contribute positively to welfare
(such as the costs of commuting or legal services) and by adding monetary estimates of activities that do contribute to welfare (such as leisure or
work at home). The second step was to convert the MEW in a “sustainable
measure of economic welfare” (SMEW) that takes into account changes in
total wealth. The relation between the MEW and the SMEW is akin to that
between GNP and NNP in standard national accounts: the SMEW measures
the level of MEW that is compatible with preserving the capital stock, given
the deﬁnition of capital stock retained by the builders of the index.

1 . 4 C OR R E C T I N G G D P

( 17 )

To convert the MEW into the SMEW, an estimate of total public and
private wealth was computed that included reproducible capital, nonreproducible capital (limited to land and net foreign assets), educational capital
(based on the cumulated cost of years spent in education by people belonging to the labor force) and health capital, based on a method of permanent
inventory with a depreciation rate of 20% per year.
Nordhaus and Tobin provided an evaluation of the SMEW for the United
States over the 1929–1965 period, compared not to GDP but rather to
gross national product (GNP) which, at that time, was the indicator privileged by National Accounts. Two major conclusions emerged. First, levels
for the SMEW were signiﬁcantly higher than those of GNP, due to the large
positive contribution of leisure. Second, consistent messages were delivered by both GNP and the SMEW when considering the overall direction of
socioeconomic progress, even if the magnitudes diﬀered. Over the period
considered, the growth rate for the SMEW was about two-thirds of total
GNP growth.
Nordhaus and Tobin’s conclusion was that, despite its limits, GNP
growth remained a not-so-inadequate guide for policy. But they remained
cautious to present their work as being no more than a point of departure. Some further initiatives took place during the 1980s, such as the
Economic Aspect of Welfare index (EAW) proposed by Zolotas (1981).
The issue was then reopened in the late 1980s by Cobb and Daly (1989),
who proposed the index of sustainable welfare (ISEW), further reﬁned by
Cobb and Cobb (1994). The ISEW has much in common with the MEW or
the SMEW but with two important additions: (a) an evaluation of natural resource depletion, measured as the investment necessary to generate
a perpetual equivalent stream of renewable substitutes, and (b) the distribution of income. Nordhaus and Tobin had themselves acknowledged in
their paper that the distributional issue was one of the dimensions missing
from their index. On the other hand, the initial ISEW did not include any
monetary evaluation of leisure time, perceived as being too fragile.
A very similar indicator has been proposed since 1995 by the nongovernmental organization Redeﬁning Progress, the Genuine Progress Indicator
(GPI) (see, for instance, Talberth, Cobb, and Slattery 2006). ISEW and GPI
have been often presented as alternative names for the same index.6
Messages delivered by these indexes depart from the one that resulted
from Nordhaus and Tobin’s seminal paper. The levels of these indexes are
lower than the MEW due to the exclusion of leisure time, and they are
6. Posner and Costanza (2011) provide a list of 25 applications of this ISEW/GPI
methodology covering a total of 21 countries.

( 18 )

A Wealth of Indicators

also lower than GDP due to the incorporation of natural resource depletion and of income distribution. The magnitude of the gap varies across
countries: Bleys (2005) and Gadrey and Jany-Catrice (2006) show that
the gap between the ISEW and GDP is much higher for the UK and the
United States than for Sweden, essentially due to diﬀerent levels of income
inequality. Even more important, growth of the ISEW and the GPI is much
less than that of GNP or even negative. This has led some authors to argue
in favor of a so-called threshold hypothesis according to which GDP growth
contributes to welfare only up to a certain level, beyond which GDP and
welfare move in opposite directions (Max-Neef 1995).
Another couple of much more recent papers can also be related to
the Nordhaus-Tobin tradition. Fleurbaey and Gaulier (2009)7 and Jones
and Klenow (2010) develop monetary approaches based on the notion of
“equivalent income,” the theoretical justiﬁcation of which will be discussed
at length in chapter 4. When individuals diﬀer along nonincome dimensions, reference levels for these dimensions are chosen, and equivalent
incomes (or consumptions) are computed, that is, the monetary amounts
that, associated with reference conditions, would render people indiﬀerent
with their current position.8 These amounts can be evaluated by diﬀerent methods: marginal willingnesses to pay as revealed by market prices
(e.g., using wages as a way to value leisure) or calibration of structural
utility functions, as done, for instance, for the valuation of years of life.9
Equivalent incomes or consumptions within each country are then aggregated in a way that takes inequality into account. Nonmonetary dimensions
considered by Jones and Klenow are leisure and overall life expectancy, and
their work applies to a set of 143 countries, with a quantiﬁcation of changes
recorded between 1980 and 2000. Fleurbaey and Gaulier cover only 24
OECD countries for year 2004 but include additional nonmonetary items
such as life expectancy in good health, employment status (unemployment
is supposed to represent a larger loss in well-being than the sole income
loss) or the composition of households (a given income leads to higher
well-being in larger households that beneﬁt from economies of scale).
In both cases, correlation with GDP remains strong, but corrections
made for leisure contribute to a large reduction of the gap between the
7. The French institute CEPII has recently published updated ﬁgures (Lettre du CEPII,
n◦ 312, 2011).
8. In fact, the methodology adopted by Jones and Klenow (2010) produces rankings that are inconsistent with preferences due to the use of diﬀerent references for
diﬀerent countries (see section 4.1).
9. On this latter point, both studies rely on earlier work by Becker, Philipson, and
Soares (2005).

1 . 5 S U S TA I N A B I L I T Y A S S E S S M E N T: W E A K OR S T R ON G ?

( 19 )

United States and European countries. Covering developed as well as developing countries, Jones and Klenow also observe that the relative situation
of the latter is pushed downward due to their higher mortality level. Over
time, increases in life expectancy account for a large share of the global
growth of their well-being indicator.
An important diﬀerence between the equivalent income approach and
the monetary indexes reviewed earlier in this section is that the former
relies on an estimation of the population preferences over the various
dimensions that aﬀect well-being, whereas the latter rely only on market or imputed prices. This diﬀerence will play an important role in this
book, and it motivates our treatment of the foundations of the various
monetary approaches in two separate chapters (3 and 4). Incidentally, the
main shortcoming of the equivalent income computations in Fleurbaey and
Gaulier (2009) and Jones and Klenow (2010) is that they do not have
suﬃcient data about individual preferences and therefore provide only
illustrative prototypes of this methodology.
The monetary approaches involve complex imputations or estimations
and therefore lack the simplicity and apparent transparency that has done
so much for the success of the HDI. But we have seen that this transparency
could prove illusory. There is therefore a strong case in favor of looking
closely at more elaborate approaches of this kind, and this will indeed be an
important focus of this book.

1.5 SUSTAINABILITY ASSESSMENT: WEAK OR STRONG?
Let us move to the more speciﬁc question of assessing sustainability. This
sustainability dimension was already present in some of the indicators that
we have mentioned. Such was already the case in Nordhaus and Tobin’s
proposal, since this proposal was twofold: an index of economic welfare
(MEW), and an index of sustainable economic welfare (SMEW). Adopting
such a dual approach was not for the simple sake of providing two numbers
where one could have done the job. In Nordhaus and Tobin’s conceptual
framework, a clear distinction had to be drawn between measuring how
well we currently live (MEW) and how well we can or could live in a way
compatible with sustainability, that is, a standard of living susceptible of
being reproduced by future generations (SMEW). There is no reason at all
for the two indicators to coincide, and it is precisely the diﬀerence between
these two indicators that matters for sustainability. Either the MEW is
lower than the SMEW, in which case sustainability is warranted, or it is not.
In the ﬁrst case, we can even enjoy the consumption possibilities that are

( 20 )

A Wealth of Indicators

currently oﬀered to us more intensively without condemning future generations to be less well-oﬀ than we would be. If the MEW is higher than the
SMEW, this is the signal we are living above our means. This clearly illustrates that the SMEW, by nature, is not a suﬃcient sustainability statistic;
it makes sense only by comparaison with the MEW.
This point has been unfortunately somewhat forgotten in subsequent
attempts at the development of indexes. The quest for the ideal single
number able to fully replace GDP has sometimes led to the favoring of
SMEW-like indexes as useful summary measures of both current and future
living conditions, without paying attention to the strong loss of information that such an aggregation implies (Neumayer 2000). This criticism
applies to the ISEW/GPI indexes that were direct heirs of the SMEW. It
applies as well to attempts at building “green GDPs”. Greening GDP is often
intuitively perceived as being the natural way of correcting the environmental limits of standard GDP, but, even if this correction were easy to
perform—and such is not the case—the kind of message that such a correction sends us about sustainability is much more limited than often believed.
Green GDPs would admittedly reorder somewhat the hierarchy of countries in terms of economic performance, with “dirty” ones downgraded by
several places. But, in itself, observing that such or such country’s green
GDP is only 95% or 90% of its standard GDP does not send any message
about whether this country’s current standard of living can or cannot be
maintained in the future.
This basic limit of green GDP helps explain why progress has been so
slow on this aspect of green accounting. The point is not only that building green GDPs is demanding, it is also that the expected informational
gain is not very evident. And this criticism can also be applied to some
of the composite indexes that can be found on the market. The HDI is
immune to such a criticism, as it clearly presents itself as an index of current economic achievement, with no prospective content. The last human
development report (2011), whose main theme was sustainaibility, does
not deviate from this. It clearly separates the two dimensions of measuring the HDI and assessing how far current HDIs are sustainable. This is
indeed the right question to ask if you adhere to the choice of the HDI as an
adequate index of current well-being. But “green HDIs” have nevertheless
been proposed elsewhere (Desai 1994; Lasso de la Vega and Urrutia 2001;
Costantini and Monni 2004), simply complementing the current HDI with
emissions of some pollutants using the same rescaling and agregation technique described above. Clearly, messages sent by such indexes are not easy
to analyze. For sure, a country with a high HDI that emits large amounts
of pollutants will see once again its ranking decrease due to this addition,

1 . 5 S U S TA I N A B I L I T Y A S S E S S M E N T: W E A K OR S T R ON G ?

( 21 )

but will this drop adequately measure how far this country negatively contributes to the future well-being of mankind? Does the index send us a
more exact message about which countries are “sustainable” and which
are not? And the same kind of problem has been already mentioned concerning the Happy Planet Index: two countries having respectively a low
life expectancy and a low footprint and a high value for both may end
up classiﬁed in a similar way, while their positions clearly need to be
diﬀerentiated.
On the whole, the issue of sustainability is therefore much better
addressed by returning to Nordhaus and Tobin’s original way of raising the
problem: measuring how well we are or how much we consume is one thing,
measuring whether this corresponds to overconsumption is another. This
being posited, there are two ways to proceed. Either one follows Nordhaus
and Tobin’s choice of a (MEW, SMEW) combination, or, more directly, once
a MEW-like indicator of current well-being has been chosen, we complement it with an indicator or with some indicators that directly inform about
its sustainability, that is, the diﬀerence SMEW − MEW or any acceptable
proxy (or proxies) of it.
What have been the attempts in this direction? In this category, some
room can be made again for one composite index, the ESI (Environmental
Sustainability Index) or the EPI (Environmental Performance Index) (Estes
et al. 2005). The ESI aggregates 76 variables into 21 intermediate indicators, such as air and water quality, waste reduction, and greenhouse gas
emissions. The EPI is a reduced form of ESI, based on 16 indicators (outcomes) and is more policy oriented. Now, such a compilation of information
just allows ranking countries according to the eﬀorts they make in favor of
environmental sustainability, and, incidentally, this is done in disputable
ways: the ESI and the EPI both have biases in favor of the “sustainability”
of more advanced countries just because of the relative weight they give to
institutions and policies that help promote environmental protection. Such
institutions or policies matter, but they are not by themselves guarantees
that these countries do less harm to the environment than other countries.
Globally, neither the EPI nor the ESI really quantiﬁes how far such and such
country is from sustainability, even from the sole environmental viewpoint.
As things stand, the pure question of sustainability is addressed by only two
indicators, and with very contrasting results, Adjusted Net Savings (ANS)
and the Ecological Footprint (EF).
Adjusted Net Savings is the name that we will use here for an indicator that, depending upon authors, has been also labeled “genuine savings”
(Pearce, Hamilton, and Atkinson 1996; Hamilton and Clemens 1999) or
“genuine investment” (Arrow et al. 2004). The ANS denomination is the

( 22 )

A Wealth of Indicators

one used by a World Bank team that started, in 2004, a program of systematic compilation of this concept for all countries, and it is this latter
denomination that we shall use hereafter (World Bank 2011). Whatever
the denomination, the principle is the same. It consists in computing an
extended notion of national savings that combines net capital accumulation in the usual sense of the term with various kinds of dissavings
such as consumption of nonrenewable fossil resources, degradations of the
environment, compensated, on the positive side, by the accumulation of
knowledge or human capital. This index can also be understood as the
net variation of an encompassing concept of global or “inclusive” wealth
combining all the diﬀerent assets that matter for production and quality of life. This way of thinking about sustainability is often presented
as the “capital-based approach to sustainability.” Adjusted Net Savings
can also be amended to incorporate consequences of purely exogenous
technical progress or of population change. Technical progress can help sustain growth or well-being even when the global capital stock is declining.
Concerning population change, the practice is to consider that sustainability requires maintaining inclusive wealth per capita, meaning that a
positive population growth rate must be compensated for by larger savings
(Arrow, Dasgupta, and Mäler 2003b).
Much more will be provided in chapter 2 concerning the analytical foundations and the limits of this indicator. At this stage, we shall just recall the
main qualitative criticisms that have been addressed to this way of measuring sustainability (see, e.g., Dietz and Neumayer 2004). The main criticisms
can be gathered under three headings.
• A ﬁrst point is that merging variations of very diﬀerent assets into a
single monetary ﬁgure requires putting money values on each of them,
that, a system of relative prices, and such prices are diﬃcult to compute
in an adequate way. In fact, as we have already argued concerning the
implicit valuations hidden within the HDI, this problem will be shared
by any form of aggregate sustainability indicator. But it is necessarily
more striking for an index whose results are expressed in money units.
How is it managed by builders of the index, and what are the problems raised by their way of doing it? For some assets, prices are directly
observable on the market. But, even for these, we have no guarantee that
these prices convey the right information on the long-term collective
value of these assets. This is especially the case for the few environmental assets for which markets exist. Such markets are very probably
working in very ineﬃcient ways, due in particular to large externalities. And there are also many assets for which there are no markets at

1 . 5 S U S TA I N A B I L I T Y A S S E S S M E N T: W E A K OR S T R ON G ?

( 23 )

all, hence no observable price. Simply excluding these assets from the
computation is of course unacceptable, but incorporating them requires
relying on imputed prices, and the diﬃculty is knowing on which basis
these imputed prices can be evaluated.
• The second diﬃculty is closely related to the ﬁrst one. It corresponds
to the weak/strong sustainability debate.10 Taken literally, the additive
nature of the ANS suggests that any level of natural capital depreciation can potentially be oﬀset by a suﬃciently high rate of physical or
human capital accumulation. In other words, the index assumes that
there always exists a possibility of substituting produced capital goods
to natural ones, even when stocks for the latter become very low. Such
a vision does not ﬁt with the strong view of sustainability according to
which minimal critical stocks of natural resources are necessary for the
simple maintenance of human life, a fortiori for the maintenance of a
certain level of well-being. Because it fails to incorporate this constraint,
the ANS criterion is said to provide only a necessary condition for sustainability, not a suﬃcient one. It is in that sense that it is generally
understood as a weak sustainability criterion. Here also, the problem
is not speciﬁc to the fact of having adopted a monetary index, and
chapter 2 will show that it is not insurmountable in theory. As soon as
prices are imputed rather than observed in the market, it is always possible to greenwash the index more intensively by adopting very high prices
for all those “green” assets whose stocks are supposed to be close to critical values that would make their preservation really crucial. But a central
theme of chapter 2 will be the diﬃculty of doing so in indisputable ways.
• The third main diﬃculty appears when ANS estimates are compared
across countries (see, e.g., Everett and Wilks 1999). The most striking
result from the systematic computation of ANS indicators performed by
the World Bank is that problems of unsustainability essentially arise in
developing countries. Figure 1.3 indeed displays a positive association
between the ANS expressed as a fraction of current GDP and the current
level of GDP. Most of the countries with negative values for this ANS are
countries with GDP levels lower than $10,000 per inhabitant in 2005.
The typical case is a poor country that draws most of its income from
the exploitation of an exhaustible natural resource. In such an economy,
the only way to ensure long-run sustainability is to reinvest a suﬃcient
share of this rent into other productive assets, the returns of which will
progressively compensate for the decline of incomes provided by the

10. For a more complete view on this debate, see Neumayer (2004).

–20

0

20

40

A Wealth of Indicators

–40

Adjusted Net Saving (% of GDP)

( 24 )

0

20000

40000

60000

80000

Per Capita GDP (in 2005 constant US $)

Figure 1.3
Adjusted Net Savings (2005–2099 values) and GDP (2007 values)
Source: World Bank (2011) and UNDP (2011).

vanishing natural resource. This is the so-called Hartwick rule for sustainability (Hartwick 1977). Unsustainable poor countries are countries
that do not try or, more realistically, cannot aﬀord to conform to this
rule. Admittedly, there can be some elements of truth in the message
that such countries are on unsustainable paths. At least until recently,
economic growth indeed appeared more fragile or unstable in many less
developed countries than in already developed ones. But, if we focus on
environmental issues, the idea that there is no sustainability problem in
developed countries is strongly at odds with the idea that they are the
major contributors to environmental problems such as global warming.
All this explains why many have a marked preference for the completely
opposite messages conveyed by the Ecological Footprint. The EF compares
each country’s direct or indirect pressure on natural resources either to its
own resources or to the average of resources available per head at the worldwide level (Wackernagel and Rees 1995). This indicator is generally considered as being much more in line with the strong view of sustainability, that
is, the idea that sustainability requires a separate preservation of all environmental assets, whatever the accumulation of other produced assets. It
also conveys a message more in line with the idea that developed countries’
modes of consumption bear a large responsibility in the degradation of
the world ecosystem (Figure 1.4). It also shows how rapidly the situation

2

4

6

8

10

12

( 25 )

0

Ecological Footprint (global hectares per capita)

1 . 5 S U S TA I N A B I L I T Y A S S E S S M E N T: W E A K OR S T R ON G ?

0

20000

40000

60000

80000

Per Capita GDP (in 2005 constant US $)

Figure 1.4
Ecological Footprint and GDP (2007 values)
Source: Global Footprint Network (2010) and UNDP (2011).

seems to have deteriorated over the last decades. At the worldwide level, a
global footprint that still remained below the regenerating capacity of the
ecosystem in the 1960s is now far over this capacity, a strong message of
unsustainability indeed that does not show up with the ANS considered at
the worldwide level.
But several criticisms have been also addressed to this indicator.11 They
can be classiﬁed under two headings, internal or external. Internal criticisms admit the general idea of the index but discuss the details of its
implementation. It is beyond the scope of this chapter and of the whole
volume to discuss these practical issues at length, but one must recall that,
exactly as is done by monetary indicators, the Ecological Footprint needs
some rules for weighting diﬀerent forms of pressure on the environment.
This is the inescapable price to pay for aggregation, and the fact of aggregating things in a unit that is not monetary —global hectares— changes
the nature of the problem only in appareance, not in reality.

11. A forum had been devoted to the Ecological Footprint in volume 32 of Ecological
Economics. Several other papers have been devoted to the index since then by the same
journal and by other outlets. The interested reader can ﬁnd a very extensive bibliography in Wiedmann and Barrett (2010), who also include a review of perceptions and
policy uses of the footprint based on a questionnaire submitted to a panel of some 50
experts.

( 26 )

A Wealth of Indicators

Without going into details, a few consequences of the accounting rules
adopted by EF are worth emphasizing. First, in some respect, the index is
less green than one could expect. For instance, it does not really incorporate the pressure on arable land due to excessively aggressive agricultural
techniques. More precisely, since resources in arable land are postulated to
be exactly equal to the arable land actually used by agriculture, weighted by
its current average yield, this component of the footprint is mechanically
balanced at the worldwide level. The only message delivered by the indicator on this aspect of sustainability is that very densely populated countries
overconsume their arable land while sparse populations do not. Such a message is not necessarily interesting: it is not a sign of unsustainability per se
that countries with diﬀerent land endowments specialize in a way consistent with their endowments. This is all the more true at the intranational
level: it is natural for a city to “consume” more land than the actual surface
that it covers. It is only once everything is consolidated that a message of
sustainability or unsustainability can be delivered, but, once again, this will
unfortunately not be the case here due the convention of equalizing land
resources to those that are actually used at the worldwide level.
Second, by focusing on renewable resources, it also ignores how sustainability is threatened by the consumption of fossil resources. For instance,
in the EF, oil consumption raises a problem for sustainability only through
its consequences on CO2 emissions, valued according to the number of
hectares of forest that would theoretically be needed to absorb these emissions. In fact, at the end of the day, it is essentially this factor that explains
the explosion of the footprint over the last decades, other components of
the index being, by contrast, surprisingly ﬂat. This suggests isolating this
important factor and then looking for better ways of capturing imbalances
along the other dimensions. Indeed, over the last years, the concept of carbon footprint has started taking precedence over the initial EF indicator
(Wiedmann and Minx 2008), and footprint-like approaches have started
being developed for some other items not initially covered by the EF, such
as the water footprint (Hoekstra 2009).
As far as external criticism is concerned, discomfort with this index
points to its complete ignorance of possibilities oﬀered by substitution
with other factors of production—the weak/strong sustainability debate
once again—or through technical progress. Critics argue that even if substitution possibilities between produced and nonproduced assets are not
inﬁnite, they are real, and that indicators that neglect them give an overly
pessimistic view of future eco-environmental prospects. One can also point
out that an indicator that focuses on natural resources is no more suﬃcient than the ANS for sustainability. For instance, an economy that has

1 . 6 C OP I N G W I T H M U LT I DI M E N S I O N A L I T Y : DA S H B OA R D S

( 27 )

a very parsimonious use of its natural resources but that stops investing
in physical capital or in education is on a path that is no more sustainable than an economy that does exactly the opposite. Indicators such
as the EF miss this aspect of sustainability, because they only focus on
the environmental dimension. It is precisely one of the attractive aspects
of the ANS approach that it tries to combine both environmental and
nonenvironmental dimensions of development.
In a nutshell, also considering the EPI/ESI,12 sustainability is probably
the domain where a consensus seems the most out of reach. The situation
appears much more diﬃcult than for current well-being. In this latter case,
although alternatives to GDP can lead to signiﬁcant corrections, they generally do not result in a complete reversal of the hierarchy of countries: the
high correlation between GDP and the HDI shown by ﬁgure 1.2 is illustrative of that. When one turns to sustainability, one is confronted by two
completely opposite paradigms. One might seek a way of picking up what
seems to make sense on both sides. But subsuming the opposition under
one single metaindicator looks problematic. The alternative strategy is to
let the divergent indicators live their own lives, improving them whenever
needed, but putting them on comparable levels, as incorporting two distinct and complementary views of sustainability that are not reducible to
one another. It is then the responsibility of civil society or of policymakers
to see how one can cope with these contradictory signals. This is precisely
the philosophy of the last approach we need to examine, which consists in
equipping users with multidimensional dashboards combining indicators
of various sorts.

1.6 COPING WITH MULTIDIMENSIONALITY: DASHBOARDS
As already emphasized, the “dashboard” approach to measuring well-being
or its sustainability has a long tradition that can be traced back to the
social indicators movement of the 1960s. After the period of setback that
followed the ﬁrst oil shock, interest in this way of presenting statistics
came into favor again during the 1990s, now with a stronger focus on
environmental issues, and, as mentioned, international organizations have
played a large role in this reemergence. The main outcome of the Rio
summit in 1992 was the adoption of Agenda 21, whose fortieth chapter
invited signatory countries to develop quantitative information on their
12. For a more detailed comparative analysis that simultaneously covers the ANS, the
EF, and ESI/EPI, see Pillarisetti and van den Bergh (2010).

( 28 )

A Wealth of Indicators

actions and realizations along the three “Bruntlandian” pillars of economic
eﬃciency, social equity, and environmental sustainability. The direct result
of this recommendation has been a work program launched in 1995 by
the United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development (UNCSD),
which ﬁrst came out with a preliminary list of 134 indicators, later reduced
to 58 indicators after some pilot-testing conducted between 1996 and
1999. The third revision of this list (UN Department of Economic and
Social Aﬀairs 2007) now includes about 50 core indicators completed by
an equivalent number of “other” indicators.
Several parallel or related initiatives took place at some other international levels. The OECD, again, has been active in the ﬁeld by continuing
the publication of the list of social indicators it started to publish in the
1970s and by developing a new set of key environmental indicators whose
publication started in 2001. At the European level, the European Council
adopted its own strategy for sustainable development in 2001, later revised
in 2006, leading to still another Dashboard of Sustainable Development,
with 11 key indicators and a complete list of about 100 indicators. National
actions have followed or preceded this general movement, albeit in a somewhat scattered way. A review made for Eurostat in 2004 among members of
the European Union showed large variations across countries at this time:
between 14 and 218 indicators for the broadest versions of their countryspeciﬁc dashboards, and between 14 and 25 for their narrower versions
focusing on headline indicators —when such versions existed.
To illustrate what dashboards are and to help discuss their pros and cons,
table 1.1 fully reproduces the contents of the UNCSD dashboard, in its 2007
version. What are the merits of this methodology? First, under the presentation adopted in the UNCSD dashboard, messages from GDP, while not
hidden, are very clearly relegated to a nonprominent place. Second, from
the point of view of statisticians, dashboards are a good way to advertise
the many facets of their production, without the problematic step of trying to summarize this information in the form of composite indexes. This
does not mean that aggregation is fully ruled out, but it is left to ﬁnal
users. Oﬃcial statisticians prefer not to be in charge of saying by how much
income must be weighted against additional years of life or other nonmonetary aspects of well-being. This is supposed to be a matter of personal
values, not of scientiﬁc judgment. As mentioned above, the possibility of
testing diﬀerent weighting factors has been already proposed by Osberg
and Sharpe (2002). Modern communication tools allow doing this in a
much more systematic way, with clients of statistical websites being able
to perform their own online aggregations and vizualise their results in various forms. We have seen that it is the strategy followed by OECD with

Table 1.1. AN ILLUSTR ATIVE DA SHBOARD: THE UNCSD INDIC ATORS OF SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT, THIRD REVISION

Theme
Poverty

Subtheme

Core indicator

Income poverty

Proportion of population living below national poverty line

Income inequality

Ratio of share in national income of highest to lowest quintile

Sanitation

Proportion of population using an improved sanitation facility

Drinking water

Proportion of population using an improved water source

Access to energy

Share of households without electricity or other modern

Living conditions

Proportion of urban population living in slums

energy services
Governance
Health

Corruption

Percentage of population having paid bribes

Crime

Number of intentional homicides per 100,000 population

Mortality

Under-ﬁve mortality rate

Health care delivery

Other indicator
Proportion of population below $1 a day

Percentage of population using solid fuels
for cooking

Life expectancy at birth

Healthy life expectancy at birth

Percentage of population with access to primary health care

Contraceptive prevalence rate

facilities
Immunization against infectious childhood diseases
Nutritional status

Nutritional status of children

Health status and risks

Morbidity of major diseases such as HIV/AIDS, malaria,

Prevalence of tobacco use

tuberculosis
Suicide rate
Education

Education level

Gross intake ratio to last grade of primary education

Lifelong learning

Net enrolment rate in primary education
Adult secondary (tertiary) schooling attainment level
Literacy

Adult literacy rate
Continued

Table 1.1. (continued)
Theme
Demographics

Subtheme
Population

Core indicator
Population growth rate

Other indicator
Total fertility rate

Dependency ratio
Tourism

Ratio of local residents to tourists in major
tourist regions and destinations

Natural hazards
Atmosphere

( 30 )

Land

Vulnerability to natural hazards

Percentage of population living in hazard prone areas

Disaster preparedness and response

Human and economic loss due to natural disasters

Climate change

Carbon dioxide emissions

Ozone layer depletion

Consumption of ozone depleting substances

Air quality

Ambient concentration of air pollutants in urban areas

Land use and status

Emissions of greenhouse gases

Land use change
Land degradation

Desertiﬁcation
Agriculture

Land aﬀected by desertiﬁcation
Arable and permanent cropland area

Fertilizer use eﬃciency
Use of agricultural pesticides
Area under organic farming

Forests

Proportion of land area covered by forests

Percentage of forest trees damaged by
defoliation
Area of forest under sustainable forest
management

Coastal zone
Source: United Nations 2007

Percentage of total population living in coastal areas

Bathing water quality

Table 1.1. (continued)
Theme
Oceans, seas,
and coasts

Subtheme

Core indicator

Fisheries

Proportion of ﬁsh stocks within safe biological limits

Marine environment

Proportion of marine area protected

Other indicator

Marine trophic index

Area of coral reef ecosystems and percentage live cover
Freshwater

Water quantity

Proportion of total water resources used
Water use intensity by economic activity

Water quality

Presence of faecal coliforms in freshwater

Biochemical oxygen demand in water bodies
Wastewater treatment

Biodiversity

Ecosystem

Proportion of terrestrial area protected, total and by ecological
region

Management eﬀectiveness of protected
areas

( 31 )

Area of selected key ecosystems
Fragmentation of habitats
Species

Change in threat status of species

Abundance of selected key species
Abundance of invasive alien species

Economic
development

Macroeconomic
performance

Gross domestic product per capita

Gross saving

Investment share in GDP

Adjusted Net Savings as percentage of gross
national income (GNI)
Inﬂation rate

Sustainable public ﬁnance

Debt to GNI ratio

Employment

Employment-population ratio

Vulnerable employment

Labor productivity and unit labor costs
Share of women in wage employment in the nonagricultural
sector
Continued

Table 1.1. (continued)
Theme

Subtheme
Information and communication

Core indicator
Internet users per 100 population

technologies

Other indicator
Fixed telephone lines per 100 population
Mobile cellular telephone subscribers per
100 population

Research and development

Gross domestic expenditure on R&D as a
percentage of GDP

Global economic

Tourism

Tourism contribution to GDP

Trade

Current account deﬁcit as percentage of GDP

partnership

Share of imports from developing countries
and from LDCs
Average tariﬀ barriers imposed on exports
from developing countries and LDCs

External ﬁnancing

Net Oﬃcial Development Assistance (ODA) given or
received as a percentage of GNI

Foreign direct investment (FDI) net inﬂows
and net outﬂows as percentage of GDP
Remittances as percentage of GNI

Consumption and
production

Material consumption

Material intensity of the economy

Domestic material consumption

Energy use

Annual energy consumption, total and by main user

Share of renewable energy sources in total

patterns

category

energy use

Intensity of energy use, total and by economic activity
Waste generation
and management
Transportation

Generation of hazardous waste

Generation of waste

Waste treatment and disposal

Management of radioactive waste

Modal split of passenger transportation

Modal split of freight transport
Energy intensity of transport

1 . 7 T H E C OR E Q U E S T ION : HO W FA R C A N AG G R E G AT ION G O ?

( 33 )

its Your Better Life Index. This is part of a more general communication
strategy developed by statistical (national or international) organizations
to reconqueer the conﬁdence of citizens after years of progressive deterioration due to the increasing gap between oﬃcial statistics and individual
perceptions of socioeconomic change.
Furthermore, beyond being a convenient way to promote existing statistics, dashboards are also one way to help develop new ones. Trying to
implement a comprehensive dashboard of socioeconomic development
helps in identifying gaps in statistical production, or needs for improved
international harmonization of statistics. Dashboards also have the advantage of being relatively easy to tailor to the needs of policymakers or to
the requests of representatives of civil society: their development can be
participatory, especially for dashboards developed at a local level.
But the main drawback of dashboards comes from their richness. The
natural criticism of these dashboards is their very hybrid character and the
fact that their composition often looks arbitrary. One can also be worried
about the lack or harmonization of dashboards, the frequent changes that
occur in their compositions, or the fact that they deliver too much information to be eﬃcient communication tools, even when their main messages
are summed up in a limited set of headline indicators.

1.7 THE CORE QUESTION: HOW FAR CAN AGGREGATION GO?
What lessons can be retained from this introductory chapter? As announced in its preamble, we have the conﬁrmation that the problem with challenging GDP is not the lack of competitors nor the fact that this research
ﬁeld has been left abandoned for decades — quite the opposite. Initiatives
have mushroomed after the stream of “social indicators” and Nordhaus
and Tobin’s seminal work in the 1960–1970s. Initatives have emerged
from various horizons, carried through or sponsored by academics, international organizations, and various nongovernmental organizations. The
resulting landscape is quite intricate and heterogeneous, still evolving,
and we did not in this chapter pretend to oﬀer a thorough visit to all its
recesses. The aim was mainly to provide an illustrated taxonomy of its main
elements.
Hopefully, this has been enough to reveal the problems that are at stake.
The major one is to ﬁnd an acceptable compromise in terms of aggregation.
At one extreme, extensive dashboards allow full pictures of the performance of countries in many respects. They are useful, but their choice of
avoiding any loss of information is both their strength and their limit.

( 34 )

A Wealth of Indicators

The impossibility of deriving any clear synthetic message from such large
dashboards explains the recurrent tendency to go back to the much simpler
messages provided by GDP. If the situation remains that of having GDP on
one side, and plethoric dashboards on the other, it is likely that the former’s preeminence will remain durably uncontested. Single numbers have
a natural power of attraction against which excessively rich sets of detailed
ﬁgures cannot compete.
Is there conversely some scope for arranging the heterogeneous information of existing dashboards in a way that could provide a better challenger to GDP? What has been said on limits of composite indicators casts
some doubts about the relevance of this track. It is therefore likely that the
optimal solution lies somewhere in between, with an intermediate level of
aggregation that will preserve complementary points of views on items that
are the most diﬃcult to reduce to one another. But this requires two things:
a clear view of what are the few dimensions of well-being and its durability that deserve separate measures, and, since aggregation will remain
necessary within each of these dimensions, what rules can be followed to
have it done as appropriately as possible. Can aggregation still be done in
monetary units, as Nordhaus and Tobin proposed, or would other metrics
be more appropriate? These questions will provide the main thread for all
subsequent chapters, starting with the domain that is perhaps the most
contentious, sustainability.
