Annual Review of Economics

How Economic Development
Influences the Environment
Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

Seema Jayachandran
Department of Economics and School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey, USA; email: jayachandran@princeton.edu

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022. 14:229–52

Keywords

First published as a Review in Advance on
April 18, 2022

environmental conservation, economic growth, poverty reduction,
environmental Kuznets curve

The Annual Review of Economics is online at
economics.annualreviews.org
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics082321-123803
Copyright © 2022 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved
JEL codes: O13, O44, Q01, Q56

Abstract
Reducing global poverty and addressing climate change and other environmental crises are among the most important challenges facing humanity
today. This review discusses one way in which these problems are intertwined: how economic development affects the environment. I synthesize
recent micro-empirical research on the environmental effects of economic
development in low- and middle-income countries. The studies that I discuss identify the causal effects of specific aspects of economic development,
such as greater household purchasing power, expanded access to credit, more
secure property rights, technological progress, and stronger regulatory capacity. I conclude by outlining some gaps in the literature.

229

1. INTRODUCTION

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

Reducing global poverty and halting climate change and environmental degradation are two of
the most important challenges facing humankind today. These problems are intertwined. Climate
change threatens economic prosperity, especially in low-income countries, where it endangers
the livelihoods and health of vulnerable populations. Also, just as environmental changes can
have economic effects, economic changes can affect the environment. For example, as average
household income rises, more people can afford cars and large homes, and thus their carbon
footprints expand.
This review focuses on one of the two directions of causality connecting these challenges: how
economic development affects the environment. It would be fortuitous if the choices that maximize economic prosperity also maximized environmental quality. The inconvenient truth is that
such a perfect alignment rarely occurs. Thus, individuals and societies often have to make a tradeoff between economic growth and environmental protection. This does not imply, however, that
economic development is always bad for the environment. Development can expand the set of
choices available to us—for example, if a new, cleaner way to generate energy is invented. Economic prosperity can also strengthen people’s willingness to forgo a part of their income to achieve
a cleaner environment. No one maximizes solely their economic prosperity, and as people achieve
a higher standard of living, they can prioritize the environment without sacrificing basic needs.
Further, economic development is not a monolithic force. It manifests in myriad ways and
influences a wide range of behaviors. Therefore, it does not have a uniform effect on environmental
quality. Manufacturing-led economic growth often increases air pollution, whereas expansion of
the service sector might not. For the purposes of this article, I take economic development to
mean a constellation of phenomena that typically bring about greater economic prosperity or
accompany it, such as higher average household income, more developed capital markets, and
better physical infrastructure. Each element of development could theoretically accelerate or slow
down environmental degradation; even element by element, the relationship between economic
development and the environment is nuanced.
A large body of research at the intersection of development economics and environmental
economics has studied how the different elements of economic development influence the environment. This literature collectively provides an understanding of how and in what circumstances
economic development helps or hurts different dimensions of environmental quality. In this article, I review this research, focusing on micro-empirical studies from the past decade that use
design-based inference. By design-based inference, I mean that the variation in the explanatory
factors that is used to estimate effects is random or as-if random, arising from an experiment,
discontinuity, or other specific source that the researchers discuss and justify as exogenous. This
inclusion criterion narrows the scope of the review; for some topics, there are almost no studies
that meet it. For example, I omit discussion of how population growth affects the environment,
even though fertility decline is an important force through which economic development could
alleviate pressure on the environment. Similarly, I do not discuss the effects of urbanization. That
said, within the topics I do discuss, I relax the inclusion criterion on a few occasions to discuss
studies that represent the most compelling evidence on an important question.
In Section 2, I present descriptive evidence on the link between economic development
and environmental quality and discuss the environmental Kuznets curve (EKC) hypothesis.
In Section 3, I discuss evidence on the effects of income growth and access to capital on the
environment. Section 4 focuses on technological progress and infrastructure. In Section 5, I turn
to institutional changes that often accompany economic development, specifically strengthening
of property rights, improved regulatory capacity, trade openness, and market competition. I
conclude by discussing some of the open research questions in the literature.
230

Jayachandran

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

US consumption of lead in gasoline
(1,000s of metric tons)

250

200

150

100

50

0
1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Year
Figure 1
Lead from gasoline in the United States. Adapted with permission from Nriagu (1990).

2. DESCRIPTIVE EVIDENCE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
AND ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
According to EKC hypothesis, at low levels of per capita income, the negative effects of economic progress on the environment are dominant, but eventually the beneficial effects become
the stronger force. This influential hypothesis predicts that environmental degradation exhibits an
inverted-U, or hump-shaped, relationship with income per capita (Grossman & Krueger 1995).1
When the hypothesis was first formulated, it aimed to describe the effects of international trade.
Trade openness might encourage the expansion of dirty industries in poor countries alongside
the growth of less polluting industries in richer countries, for example. But beyond trade, other
elements of economic development, or a combination of them, could generate an inverted-U. For
example, lead pollution from gasoline rose and fell in the United States over the second half of the
twentieth century (see Figure 1). The first step in the trajectory of lead use was a technological
advance: the discovery in the 1920s that adding lead to gasoline reduces the so-called engine
knock. As cars became more powerful, they used more gasoline per mile. Rising incomes meant
that more households could afford cars, and the rapid expansion of the road and highway network
made travel by road a cheap and convenient option for many. Then, the United States reached a
turning point. In response to a growing awareness of the health effects of air pollution, the federal
government enacted the 1970 Clean Air Act, which led to regulation that phased out the use of
lead in gasoline. Lead pollution from gasoline fell steadily over the next two decades. In short, the
emergence of a new technology, rising income levels, improved infrastructure, advances in health
knowledge, and improvements in regulatory capacity caused the rise and fall of lead use in gasoline
in the United States.
Although the case of leaded gasoline maps perfectly to the predicted EKC trajectory, it represents an exception. In the data, we sometimes observe a monotonic positive correlation between
GDP per capita and environmental damage. Carbon emissions per person exhibit this pattern, as

1 The name is based on the Kuznets curve, or economist Simon Kuznets’ hypothesis that there is an inverted-U

relationship between inequality and economic development.
www.annualreviews.org

•

How Economic Development Influences the Environment

231

a

100

PM2.5 annual mean concentration
in urban areas

CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)

15

5

–5

1,000

10,000

80

60

40

20

0

100,000

b

1,000

10,000

100,000

GDP per capita (PPP, 2016 USD)

GDP per capita (PPP, 2018 USD)

c
80

Ozone pollution
mean annual exposure (ppb)

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

25

60
Middle East and North Africa
East Asia and Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
North America
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America and Caribbean
South Asia
Fitted values

40

20

0

1,000

10,000

100,000

GDP per capita (PPP, 2017 USD)
Figure 2
Relationship between environmental damage and GDP per capita. The dashed line in each panel is the best-fit quadratic line. (a) CO2
emissions per capita. Data from World Bank (2018, 2020). (b) Urban particulate matter. PM2.5 concentrations are measured regularly at
fixed-site monitors within metropolitan areas. The country-level measure is a population-weighted average of the city-level measures.
Data from WHO (2016). (c) Ozone. Data from Health Eff. Inst. (2020). Abbreviations: PM2.5 , fine particulate matter; ppb, parts per
billion; PPP, purchasing power parity.

shown in Figure 2a: The carbon footprint per person is systematically higher in richer countries
than in poorer countries. The relationship is mostly linear, and the best-fit quadratic curve is Ushaped rather than an inverted-U. In other cases, we observe a negative correlation. For example,
particulate matter levels in cities follow this pattern, as shown in Figure 2b. For other environmental measures, such as ozone levels, there is no clear correlation between countries’ pollution
levels and GDP per capita (Figure 2c). These patterns do not necessarily falsify the EKC hypothesis. Perhaps at this point in history, all the countries in the world are on the rising part of
the Kuznets curve for CO2 emissions, i.e., the turning point is at a higher income level than any
country has reached yet. Moreover, these are raw correlations and not causal effects. Nonetheless,
232

Jayachandran

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

it seems very likely that the relationship between development and the environment will differ
across pollutants and will not have a simple, generalizable link with economic development.
The descriptive evidence I have presented matches the consensus view in the literature, which
is that there is limited empirical support for the EKC hypothesis (Stern 2017). In part, we lack
convincing tests of the hypothesis due to the difficulty of isolating exogenous changes in GDP
per capita. In addition—and perhaps more importantly—there is no a priori reason to assume
that when we account for all the forces that constitute economic development, the detrimental
ones prevail at low levels of development and the beneficial ones at higher levels of development.
Indeed, the overarching view in this review is that we should not expect to give a blanket answer
to the question, Does development help or hurt the environment in low-income countries? In fact,
the question is ill-posed because it disregards how development came about. Most micro-empirical
studies aim to answer the narrower but well-defined question of how a particular cause or feature
of economic development influences environmental outcomes (in a particular context). I now turn
to discussing these studies.

3. INCOME AND ACCESS TO CAPITAL
I divide my discussion of the different facets of economic development into three sections. In the
first one, I discuss how rising household income and both households’ and firms’ greater access
to capital affect the environment. The next section focuses on advances in two types of public
goods: technology and physical infrastructure. Finally, I discuss institutions, which can be thought
of as a more intangible type of infrastructure—that is, the formal and informal rules that underpin
economic activity.

3.1. Changes in Consumption from Income Growth
When households have more income, they consume more of most goods. The production and
use of goods can deplete natural resources and generate pollution. Not only does the scale of
consumption increase with income, but the composition of what people consume also changes,
which could either exacerbate or offset their environmental footprint.
3.1.1. Energy use. Richer people are more likely to have electricity connections in their homes.
Although electricity might sometimes displace a more environmentally harmful energy source
(e.g., firewood), often it increases total energy use, as households purchase energy-intensive appliances such as refrigerators and air conditioners. Unless the electricity is generated from solar,
wind, or other renewable sources, powering these devices depletes natural resources and causes
pollution. Similarly, households begin to buy automobiles as they become richer, which also taxes
the environment. Figure 3 shows the steep positive cross-country relationship between motor
vehicle ownership and GDP per capita.
To better understand these trends, several recent studies have used exogenous variation in antipoverty transfers to examine how changes in income affect consumption. For example, Gertler
et al. (2016) examined a conditional cash transfer (CCT) program to estimate the income elasticity
of energy-intensive appliance purchases. Their study focused specifically on refrigerator purchases
among Mexican households who were eligible for the CCT program Oportunidades. They leveraged both the randomized timing of the program rollout in the 1990s and variation in the transfer
amount across households based on family composition. They estimated that receiving a transfer
of 40,000 pesos, which was the median cumulative transfer between 1997 and 2007 in their sample, increased the likelihood of owning a refrigerator from 4% to 23%. Unsurprisingly, the effect
was not uniform across groups. Transfers to initially very poor families or a small transfer to any
family was not enough to trigger a large, lumpy purchase. Moreover, once a household bought a
www.annualreviews.org

•

How Economic Development Influences the Environment

233

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

Motor vehicles per 1,000 people

1,000

800

Middle East and North Africa
East Asia and Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
North America
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America and Caribbean
South Asia
Fitted values

600

400

200

0
1,000

10,000

100,000

GDP per capita (PPP, 2014 USD)
Figure 3
Relationship between car ownership and GDP per capita. GDP per capita data are from World Bank (2020).
Vehicle data are from NationMaster (2014). The dashed line is the best-fit quadratic line. Abbreviation: PPP,
purchasing power parity.

refrigerator, it would rarely want a second one. In line with this, refrigerator ownership followed
an S-shape in income: shallow, then steep, and then leveling off.
Hanna & Oliva (2015) used data from the West Bengal, India, site of Banerjee et al.’s (2015)
multicountry randomized controlled trial (RCT) of a program targeting ultra-poor households.
The multifaceted graduation program consisted of an asset transfer (e.g., two cows, four goats), a
stipend, and weekly meetings, among other components, and led to a large and persistent increase
in both assets and consumption in the India site. Hanna & Oliva (2015) found that participation
in the program led to a 22% increase in fuel consumption. They tested if households transitioned
to cleaner or more fuel-efficient technologies (e.g., liquefied petroleum gas stoves) and found no
evidence of such a shift.
3.1.2. Diet. Another common shift in consumption as people become richer is that meat and
dairy start to comprise a larger share of their diet. This transition has environmental consequences,
as animal-based foods are more land intensive than grains, fruits, and vegetables.
Haushofer & Shapiro (2016) conducted an RCT to trace how poor households in rural Kenya
spent the unconditional cash transfers provided by the nongovernmental organization (NGO)
GiveDirectly. The average transfer amount was $700, adjusted for purchasing power parity. They
estimated that recipient households increased their food spending by 19% and began consuming
relatively more meat and fish; spending on meat and fish rose by 39% compared to a 10% increase
for cereals (grains). These findings align with a recent study that used panel data from Ethiopia to
study how changes in food consumption correlate with income changes over time (Worku et al.
2017). This study found that meat and dairy comprised 18% of the total food expenditures of the
richest quintile of Ethiopian households, compared to 7% for the poorest quintile. These dietary
patterns suggest that, as households become richer, food production will require more land.
234

Jayachandran

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

Less clear-cut is how the changes in food consumption transformed local land use, as the food
might have been produced elsewhere. Alix-Garcia et al. (2013) studied the relationship between
income and changing land use in Mexico. The authors used a regression discontinuity (RD) design
to compare deforestation in communities just poor enough to be eligible for the Oportunidades
program and communities that just missed the cutoff. The authors found that access to the cash
transfer program led to an increase in deforestation. They provided additional evidence that transfer recipients increased their consumption of land-intensive foods such as beef and milk, which
suggests that the forest was cleared to enable cattle farming. Interestingly, the study also showed
that market access influenced the effect of the cash transfers on local deforestation. The increase
in deforestation was concentrated in communities with low road density, which the study used as
a proxy for limited access to trade.2 An important caveat is that road density could be capturing
other dimensions of underdevelopment rather than market access.
Another point to keep in mind when interpreting these findings is that increased demand for
meat will lead to more land being allocated for meat production, whether in the same locality or
elsewhere. Malerba (2020) used a difference-in-differences (DiD) design to study the effects of
Familias en Acción, Colombia’s health-and-education CCT, and found that recipients consumed
more beef and milk, but, if anything, deforestation decreased. Presumably, land beyond the locality
was allocated to cattle grazing to meet this increased demand for animal products. Nonetheless,
limited access to trade might exacerbate ecological impacts, because if production and consumption can be decoupled geographically, then it is possible to strategically locate the cattle industry
in less ecologically sensitive areas.
Most studies do not quantify the carbon footprint of dietary changes, but an exception is provided by Feng et al. (2020). They examined changes between the 1992 and 2007 rounds of China’s
Urban Household Income and Expenditure Survey, a period during which average household
expenditure on animal-based food increased by over 50%, while spending on cereals decreased.
Interestingly, despite this dietary change, they concluded that the carbon footprint of Chinese
diets decreased overall because of energy-efficiency gains in the food industry. A related study in
China by He et al. (2019) considered what the effect on CO2 emissions would be if all households
switched to the dietary quantity and diversity recommended by health experts, and they estimated
that it would increase greenhouse gas emissions by 7.5%. This result highlights that the diets of
the poor have a lower carbon footprint partly because they are undernourished or have low dietary
diversity; there is some tension between better diets and environmental conservation, but only up
to a point.
3.1.3. Willingness to pay for environmental protection. Although everyone likely values
environmental quality, all else being equal, people will be more willing and able to sacrifice some
of their income to improve it after they have satisfied their basic needs such as food and health care.
Greenstone & Jack (2015, p. 12), who present a simple model that lays out this reasoning, write,
“[A]s the budget constraint is relaxed, the value of an additional unit of consumption falls and
the trade-off between consumption and environmental quality becomes less extreme, increasing
demand for the latter.” Moreover, in more economically developed regions, people are more aware
of the health and productivity costs of environmental degradation, which offers another reason
they might support environmental protection more.
An important distinction is whether people value self-protection—i.e., they perceive the private, instrumental benefits of environmental quality—or they also altruistically value the benefits
2A

related study, by Lawlor et al. (2020), investigated how market integration influenced the ecological effects
of a cash transfer program in Zambia.
www.annualreviews.org

•

How Economic Development Influences the Environment

235

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

enjoyed by others or environmental quality per se. Franzen & Vogl (2013) showed that there is an
association between economic development and the more expansive form of environmentalism.
They constructed an index of the survey questions about environmental concern in the 2010 round
of the International Social Survey Programme, including “How willing would you be to accept
cuts in your standard of living in order to protect the environment?” and respondents’ agreement
with the statement “We worry too much about the future of the environment and not enough
about prices and jobs.” They found that environmental concern is higher in countries with higher
GDP per capita and, within countries, among higher-earning and more educated individuals.
Most work in economics on this topic investigates the demand for self-protection. To my
knowledge, none of these studies uses exogenous variation in income. For this reason, and because Greenstone & Jack (2015) nicely synthesized the pre-2015 literature, I discuss this line of
research only briefly. Ashraf et al. (2010) and Berry et al. (2020) conducted early studies that examined the willingness to pay (WTP) for water purification, finding no strong link between WTP
and household income or wealth. Ito & Zhang (2020b) studied air pollution by analyzing purchase decisions for air filters in China. They found that WTP for clean indoor air is increasing in
income. Baylis et al. (2021) offered people face masks at randomly varying prices in New Delhi,
India, and also found that WTP is increasing in income as well as in education. The study also
reported that less educated individuals were more likely to underestimate the health impacts of
exposure to air pollution.
A related literature, which includes the work of Baylis et al. (2021), uses information campaigns
to assess whether knowledge about the health impacts of pollution drives the demand for environmental quality. Several experiments try to correct misperceptions and then test if WTP for selfprotective products changes as a result. The literature offers mixed results, which is unsurprising
because whether a campaign increases WTP depends on the effectiveness of the particular messaging. However, there does seem to be a general pattern whereby people underestimate the personal
harms from pollution, and this misinformation is more pronounced among poorer people.
Barwick et al. (2020) offer particularly compelling evidence on the effects of information. They
document how people changed their behavior when the Chinese government began reporting
more accurate and regular information about local air quality, which happened in a geographically
staggered way beginning in 2013. One effect was that people began avoiding shopping trips (and
presumably other outdoor activity) when air quality was particularly bad. In addition, the more
persistent component of air quality was capitalized into housing prices. These results focus on how
people reduced their exposure to pollution, not how pollution levels changed. Nonetheless, by increasing the demand for clean air, information could spur air quality improvements—for example,
if people start to pressure their governments to address pollution. Thus, improvements in knowledge could be an important pathway through which development increases environmental quality.

3.2. Access to Capital
Another implication of rising incomes is that people have the capital to make profitable investments that were unavailable to them when they were poorer. In principle, poverty need not be
a barrier to investment: People can take out loans and repay them with the investment profits.
However, access to credit, which is both a cause and an effect of economic growth, is much more
limited in low-income countries (Levine 1997). Whether the source of increased liquidity is one’s
own income or better developed financial markets, the investments it enables can have environmental implications, both good and bad.
3.2.1. Productive investments. Consider someone who has the skills to pursue two productive activities. One generates low profits but requires less capital; the other is more profitable but
236

Jayachandran

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

requires a large upfront investment. A credit-constrained individual will only be able to pursue
the first activity, but with increased access to capital, they will switch to the second, more profitable one. Whether that switch is good or bad for the environment depends on which option is
more land intensive, energy intensive, and polluting. There is no general theoretical prediction to
guide us, and, consistent with this observation, different empirical studies report quite different
effects of access to capital on the environment.
For example, Assunção et al. (2020) used a DiD design to study a tightening of access to credit
in rural Brazil and reported that the policy change reduced deforestation. Even though the policy
was explicitly aimed at protecting the forest, the authors argued that the key mechanism was the
reduction in access to credit, which enabled landowners to pursue land-intensive cattle ranching.
Wilebore et al. (2019) similarly found that access to capital had a negative effect on forest protection in Sierra Leone. They used an RCT to study a labeled cash transfer program that targeted
households living near the Gola Rainforest National Park. Households did not need to meet any
conditions to receive the transfer, but the payments were accompanied by a statement highlighting
the environmental goals of the NGO running the program and the importance of preserving the
rainforest. The authors estimated that the program led to the loss of 19 hectares of forest per village over 2 years, equivalent to 3.5% of the average area of a village, mostly in areas with regrowth
rather than mature forests. The authors argued that the money enabled households to purchase
agricultural inputs, hire labor, and buy tools to clear the land. Notably, the estimates might represent an underestimate of the pure effect of the transfer, as the pro-environment messaging likely
dissuaded some deforestation.
Other studies have observed the opposite pattern, however. López-Feldman & Chávez (2017)
showed that remittances sent from international migrants to families in Mexico caused family
members to shift away from environmentally intensive activities. Their research design entailed
instrumenting for remittances with the historical transportation costs from the village to the US
border. The authors conjectured that the remittances eased credit constraints and allowed the
families to transition to new activities that required upfront investment.
Andersen (2016, 2017) found that increases in access to credit among manufacturing firms had
positive environmental effects. In this case, pollution rather than land use was the most relevant
environmental outcome, but the effect was again theoretically ambiguous. On the one hand, credit
might enable firms to expand production; on the other hand, it could facilitate investment in
energy-saving technologies. Using differences across 37 countries in when credit bureaus were
established, Andersen (2016) found that better-functioning credit markets reduced sulfur dioxide
and lead concentrations. Andersen (2017) examined the link between a firm’s credit score and
its pollution emissions within the US manufacturing sector. Here as well, better access to credit
reduced pollution.
3.2.2. Investments in energy-saving household goods. Credit constraints can hinder households’ ability to purchase energy-efficient products that will save them money in the long run but
require upfront spending. For example, someone might forgo weatherizing their home or switching to a more fuel-efficient vehicle because of the high upfront costs. An oft-studied example in
developing countries is fuel-efficient cookstoves, which help households reduce their spending on
fuel and are better for the environment. Levine et al. (2018) compared different ways of selling
cookstoves in Kampala, Uganda. Some study participants were offered the stove in the standard
cash-and-carry way: They could purchase the cookstove on the spot by paying the asking price.
In another study arm, people were given the option to pay in four weekly installments. Only 4%
of households in the cash-and-carry study arm purchased the stove, compared to 26% of those
offered the installment plan. Although the study design could not rule out that part of the success
www.annualreviews.org

•

How Economic Development Influences the Environment

237

of the installment plan was because people could try out the stove before committing to pay the
final three installments, the results point to the importance of addressing liquidity constraints.
Berkouwer & Dean (2021) also studied the uptake of energy-efficient cookstoves, and in their
RCT in Kenya, they were able to isolate the role of credit. They found that access to credit had
a large positive effect on purchases of efficient charcoal stoves. Being offered a stove with a 3month loan (with a 1.16% monthly interest rate) increased the average WTP from $12 to $25.
The study also tracked households’ subsequent charcoal use and found that adoption of the stove
reduced it by 39%. Within a year, a household would save $120 from reduced charcoal use, which
is striking given the average WTP of $12. Consumers’ low uptake of high-return investments
in energy efficiency—the so-called energy paradox—is a puzzle seen in many contexts ( Jaffe &
Stavins 1994).

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

3.2.3. Other environmentally friendly household investments. There are other environmentally friendly goods that do not pay for themselves but that households still value, and liquidity
constraints can limit the purchase of these goods, too. BenYishay et al. (2017a) studied households’
WTP for hygienic latrines, which reduce fecal matter in the environment but require an upfront
expense. Using an RCT, they showed that access to microcredit substantially increased WTP and
adoption of the latrines.
Upfront costs can also hinder the success of conservation programs. Payments for ecosystem
services (PES) programs pay people for undertaking a specific pro-environment behavior. If the
payments are back-loaded compared to the costs that are required to comply, then credit constraints can reduce participation. Oliva et al. (2020) conducted an RCT of a program that encouraged Zambian cotton farmers to plant trees on their land. The program was run by an NGO with
the goal of promoting carbon sequestration. The PES payments were conditional on tree survival
and were therefore back-loaded, and the study found that many more farmers participated when
the upfront costs (purchase of seedlings) were subsidized.

3.3. Consumption Smoothing
Another way that credit constraints can affect environmental outcomes is if people deplete natural
resources because of an emergency need for cash. This phenomenon is particularly relevant in
the case of forests, a natural resource that people can cash out by cutting down trees and selling
the timber. Ferraro & Simorangkir (2020) studied a multi-year program for poor households in
rural Indonesia that provided cash transfers equivalent to 15–20% of the recipients’ status-quo
consumption. The authors used a DiD design based on the staggered rollout of the program across
villages and found that the cash transfers reduced forest cover loss by 30%. This environmental
benefit of the cash transfers was concentrated during times when a village experienced a rainfall
shortfall, that is, when agricultural output was low. The authors’ interpretation is that the cash
displaced deforestation as the households’ safety net when they suffered an income loss.
Jayachandran (2013) used data from an evaluation of a Ugandan PES program that incentivized
forest conservation to study how the inability to smooth consumption influences the effectiveness
of PES. Households forgo two types of income when they stop deforesting. First, they clear less
land for growing crops and so have a lower flow of income from agriculture. Second, they no
longer earn lump-sum income from selling timber. Payment levels that are high enough to offset
lost agricultural income and typical revenue from timber may not be adequate when a household
has an emergency need for cash. For example, if faced with a hospital bill that is too large to cover
with the PES income, a household without liquidity might cut down and sell an unusually large
amount of timber. Consistent with this reasoning, the study found that forest owners who sold
timber to meet their liquidity needs were less likely to enroll in the PES program. The implication
238

Jayachandran

is that PES might be a more effective tool for curbing deforestation if credit markets were better
developed, at least in this context.

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

4. TECHNOLOGY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
When technologies and infrastructure improve, boosting total factor productivity, firms can produce goods at a lower cost. This outward shift of the supply curve means expanded production,
which generally takes a toll on the environment. However, technological progress or infrastructure
might also reduce the amount of natural resources needed to produce a good. New energy-saving
machinery or improvements in electricity distribution infrastructure would enable a firm to use
fewer natural resources per unit of output. Moreover, technology and infrastructure rarely limit
themselves to facilitating the scaling up of production. They might make some production techniques more profitable than others, thus changing how goods are produced and which ones are
produced. For example, the advent of publicly available Landsat satellite imagery in the 1970s and
1980s lowered the cost of identifying gold deposits and increased gold mining (Nagaraj 2022).
Similarly, a new technology or the building of new infrastructure might prompt a shift away from
or toward land-intensive production, with environmental implications.
In addition to their effects on production, both technology and infrastructure can also influence the environment by changing what we consume. For example, advances in electric vehicle
design and improved public transportation make gasoline cars less popular and thereby reduce the
burning of fossil fuels.3 Conversely, better roads might encourage people to drive more, causing
gasoline consumption to increase among those with a gasoline car.4 Like infrastructure, new technologies can also change the energy intensity of consumption by expanding the set of products
that are available and by changing the relative prices of different products. van Benthem (2015)
calculated that today’s low-income countries have higher energy use per capita than high-income
countries had historically when they were at a similar GDP per capita, despite great advances in
energy-saving technologies in the intervening decades. A key reason is that technological progress
has led to price declines for energy and for energy-using goods such as cars. People almost always
consume more of a good when it is cheaper. As a result, consumption bundles have become more
energy intensive over time.
In the remainder of this section, I focus on two of the more active areas of research in this
literature: the effects of technology and infrastructure on agricultural productivity and the effects
of transportation infrastructure.

4.1. Increased Agricultural Productivity
Technological progress and infrastructure that boost agricultural yield (output per unit of land)
could increase or decrease land use. The optimistic view is that because more crops can be produced with less land, there will be less pressure to clear more land for agricultural use. This principle is referred to as the Borlaug hypothesis, after Norman Borlaug, who articulated the view in
his Nobel Peace Prize acceptance speech in 1970. Borlaug, the “father of the Green Revolution,”
led efforts in the 1940s to 1960s to develop high-yielding varieties of agricultural crops (HYVs),

3A

recent contribution on this topic is by Meeks et al. (2019), who studied household biogas systems—a technology that converts human and animal waste into cooking fuel and other products—in Nepal. Adoption of
biogas systems reduced deforestation.
4 Meeks et al. (2021) found that when electricity service quality improved for residential customers in the
Kyrgyz Republic after the installation of smart meters, households purchased more appliances and consumed
more electricity during peak-demand months.
www.annualreviews.org

•

How Economic Development Influences the Environment

239

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

and he believed that HYVs saved hundreds of millions of hectares of land from being converted
into agricultural fields (Borlaug 2007). However, advances that increase agricultural yield also generally lower the cost to produce a given amount of output. This means that the supply curve for
agricultural products shifts outward, so the quantity produced in equilibrium will rise. This mechanism increases the amount of land farmers require, all else being equal, and the effect could be
strong enough that gains in agricultural yield could lead to a net increase in the demand for land,
a phenomenon known as the Jevons paradox (Garcia 2020).5
Some studies have confirmed the Borlaug hypothesis, whereas others have found evidence
contradicting it. Abman et al. (2020) studied an agricultural program in Uganda run by the NGO
BRAC, which provided farmers with HYV seeds and trained them on practices such as manure
use, intercropping, and crop rotation. These intensification techniques increase agricultural yield.
BRAC ran the program in villages within 6 km of its offices, and the study used this distance cutoff
as the basis of an RD design. The core result was that the program reduced annual deforestation
between 2008 and 2013 by 13%.6 This result aligns with a global estimate that HYVs for cereals
averted 2 million hectares of deforestation between 1965 and 2004 (Stevenson et al. 2013).
In contrast, Hess et al. (2021) found that a community-driven development (CDD) program in
The Gambia led to more deforestation, in part because the demand for agricultural land increased
as yields rose. In CDD programs, each community receives a grant and chooses what type of
project to spend it on. Some of the communities used the grant to build infrastructure such as
roads and bridges, whereas others spent it on agricultural equipment and draft animals. In an
RCT among 930 villages, Hess et al. (2021) estimated that the program increased deforestation
by 12%, equivalent to a loss of 44 hectares of forest per village. The authors concluded that some
of the land clearing was for the infrastructure construction itself, but much of it was to expand
agricultural plots. The key mechanism seems to have been that the equipment and draft animals
that villages procured increased crop yields.
A CDD program in the Philippines analyzed by Pagel (2020) also led to forest cover loss. The
analysis used both an RD design based on the fact that only very poor communities were eligible
for the program and an RCT conducted at a later phase of the program. In both analyses, the
main result was that the program increased deforestation. The author’s interpretation was that
the transportation infrastructure that many villages used the funds for increased agricultural and
manufacturing productivity, and these sectors expanded, using more land. Also, because the recipient communities enjoyed higher economic productivity, people migrated in; population growth
is another likely reason for the ecological degradation.
It is important to note some limitations of the existing literature. First, most studies present
short-run effects, but investments and sectoral adjustments take time, so the long-run effects could
be quite different. Second, the studies estimate partial equilibrium effects. We would expect the
expanded production observed by Hess et al. (2021) and Pagel (2020) to depress output prices, and
this force would make the aggregate effect smaller than what the analyses find in partial equilibrium. (The caveat that most of the micro-empirical studies discussed in this review cannot capture
general equilibrium effects applies beyond this subsection.)

5 The question of whether efficiency gains in the use of a natural resource increase or decrease its use is relevant for resources beyond land. Ryan (2018) found that Indian manufacturing firms that were offered consulting on energy efficiency increased their electricity use, an example of the Jevons paradox, or rebound
effects.
6 Brainerd & Menon (2014) documented a different environmental consequence of the Green Revolution. The
increased use of chemical fertilizers seems to have worsened health outcomes among infants whose mothers
were exposed to the chemical runoff during pregnancy.

240

Jayachandran

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

Land use intensity is just one component of a production technique’s environmental footprint.
New techniques can be more or less environmentally harmful than the techniques they displace
in other ways, too. For example, over the past two decades, stubble burning, or the burning of
stalk or stubble left in the ground after crop harvesting, has become a severe environmental and
public health problem in India. The practice harms soil fertility, and it is also a major contributor
to air pollution. The main reason stubble burning has become rampant is that mechanical harvesters are now more widely used, and mechanized harvesting leaves stubble in the ground. Behrer
(2019) used India’s employment guarantee program to study this phenomenon. With a DiD design, he presented evidence on the following causal chain. The social safety net program, by offering poor people an alternative source of income, decreased the supply of agricultural workers.
This prompted farmers to adopt a labor-saving technology, that is, to mechanize. Mechanization
is not harmful to the environment per se, but in this case it was: The end result was more stubble
burning and air pollution.
Sekhri (2011) studied a different topic at the nexus of infrastructure, agricultural productivity,
and the environment. She examined the effect of public water infrastructure on agricultural water
use. An important part of the story is that public infrastructure crowded out private infrastructure.
In rural India, farmers can pay to build a private tube well and tap groundwater at no charge. When
they instead use public sources of water, they must pay a unit price, but they avoid the fixed cost
to build their own well. Sekhri (2011) examined what occurred when, between 1988 and 1993,
hundreds of public tube wells were built or rehabilitated in the state of Uttar Pradesh through
the Indo-Dutch Tube Well Program. She found that in villages where installing private infrastructure was expensive (because the groundwater level was so low that a more expensive pump
was required), new public infrastructure reduced groundwater use. This might seem surprising,
because the public water source enabled some farmers to begin irrigating their fields. However,
their increase in water use was more than offset by reduced water use among farmers who were
deterred from building their own well and had to pay for water from the public well based on how
much they used.7
To summarize, when infrastructure and technology increase agricultural production, they also
change the factor intensity of land in agriculture and cause reallocation of factors of production
from other sectors that have ecological footprints themselves. In addition, higher economic productivity influences migration and local purchasing power, which, in turn, affect the environment.
Technology can also have incidental effects on the environment, as with mechanical harvesters and
stubble burning. For these reasons, technology and infrastructure are arguably the topics covered
in this review whose effects on the environment we can make the fewest generalizations about.

4.2. Transportation Infrastructure
Roads and other transportation infrastructure that connect a location to other markets decrease
production costs by lowering the costs of acquiring inputs and of transporting finished goods. On
the consumption side, they make certain goods and services cheaper. Transportation networks also
differ from most infrastructure in that they integrate markets, which enables areas to specialize in
certain types of production. Through all of these channels, transportation infrastructure affects
where and how much ecological damage takes place.

7 Two

other studies that highlight the inefficiency of low marginal prices for natural resources are by Ito &
Zhang (2020a), on the decline in heating use when flat-rate residential customers were switched to usage-based
pricing in China, and Ryan & Sudarshan (2020), on the misallocation of water use across farmers in India due
to low marginal prices combined with quantity rationing.
www.annualreviews.org

•

How Economic Development Influences the Environment

241

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

Asher et al. (2020) studied the environmental impacts of two different types of new road access
in India. First, some villages became newly connected to a main road through a rural road-building
program, which the researchers analyzed using RD and DiD designs. Second, some communities
gained highway access because they were incidentally along the route of new highways connecting
the country’s four largest cities. The small roads were found to have zero effect on deforestation.
In contrast, places along the highway corridors experienced increased deforestation. The forest
loss along the highways seems to have been due to industrial demand for timber, consistent with
prior evidence of growth in manufacturing activity along highway routes (Ghani et al. 2016).
Garg et al. (2020) examined the same rural road-building program in India and found that
when a community acquired a new road, agricultural fires and particulate matter levels rose. Roads
facilitated a transition out of agriculture for workers, so the cost of hiring workers to clear fields
increased, causing farmers to turn to stubble burning.
A quite different type of transportation infrastructure is public transport, which can reduce
air pollution and energy use if it crowds out travel in private vehicles. Li et al. (2019) studied the
expansion of Beijing’s subway system between 2008 and 2016, during which time 14 new subways lines and 252 stations were opened. Subway expansion can have dispersed effects across the
network, but the authors assumed that the effects would diminish with greater distance from the
expansions. Using this identification assumption, they estimated that the opening of new subway lines reduced air pollution in the nearby area by 8%. Note that this is an underestimate if
there were also improvements in air quality further away from the expansions. Gendron-Carrier
et al. (2022) examined subway expansions worldwide between 2000 and 2017 and found that, on
average, subway station openings have no detectable effect on air pollution, though there were
improvements in locations where the pollution level was initially very high.

5. INSTITUTIONS
Limited state capacity and weak government institutions are major challenges in developing countries (Acemoglu et al. 2005, Besley & Persson 2009). It has long been recognized that these weaknesses can undermine environmental protection (Dasgupta & Mäler 1995, Dasgupta 1996). In this
section, I discuss some ways in which institutions typically evolve with economic development—
property rights become more secure, regulatory capacity improves, the economy becomes more
open to trade, and product markets become more competitive—and their implications for the
environment.

5.1. Property Rights
Secure and well-defined property rights, which are less common in developing countries, could
increase long-term investment in land for several reasons (Besley 1995, Besley & Ghatak 2010).
First, the expected return to investing in one’s land is higher if the risk of land expropriation
is lower; expropriation risk shortens a person’s effective time horizon. Second, formally owning
property allows one to use it as collateral, which helps lower the cost of borrowing. Third, if the
property can be sold to someone who can use it more productively, investments that might not
be profitable for the current owner become attractive. The longer time horizon, in particular, is
conjectured to be beneficial for the environment: Someone who expects to use their land for a
sustained period will pursue sustainable agricultural practices. A forest owner with a short time
horizon might cut down trees and sell them, or a farmer might overfarm their land. With more
secure property rights, this deforestation and overfarming might be avoided. For these reasons,
among others, providing land titles and strengthening property rights in developing countries
have been high on international aid agencies’ agendas for the past several decades.
242

Jayachandran

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

Ali et al. (2014) tested whether stronger property rights lead to the adoption of environmentally
friendly practices. They analyzed a land titling program in Rwanda using a spatial RD design based
on where the program was implemented. They found that receiving formal land rights caused
farmers to invest more in soil conservation. For example, farmers built terraces and embankments,
which reduce soil erosion. Under the informal system of property rights, women’s claims on their
land were more tenuous. For this reason, titling led to especially large increases in land investment
among women. This pattern echoes a finding of Goldstein & Udry (2008), who studied property
rights and fallowing in Ghana, and it suggests that granting uniformly strong property rights to
everyone can narrow gender gaps in the returns to conservation and in economic productivity.
Other studies have assessed how property rights affect deforestation. In 2009, the government
of Benin rolled out a multi-pronged intervention, called Plans Fonciers Ruraux, under which the
community demarcated customary land parcels and communal areas and the government provided
land certificates and established local institutions to facilitate conflict resolution. Wren-Lewis et al.
(2020) conducted an RCT of the program, comparing forest cover in 300 treatment villages to
275 control villages during the post-intervention period from 2009 to 2017. The intervention
reduced tree cover loss by about 20%. Based on survey data, the study suggested that the key
mechanism was improved tenure security, as farmers believed they would have enough land for
future agricultural production and had less of an incentive to clear more land. Another potential
mechanism, distinct from secure individual property rights, was that the newly established local
institutions improved the management of communally owned land. Another study on the Beninese
program found evidence of increased investment in the land, in the form of tree planting and
cultivation of perennial crops, but no increase in fallowing (Goldstein et al. 2018).
The RCTs on land titling so far have been concentrated in sub-Saharan Africa, but several
nonexperimental studies have analyzed land titling in other regions. For example, Blackman et al.
(2017) used a DiD design to study a titling program targeting indigenous communities in the Peruvian Amazon and found that it led to a significant reduction in deforestation, whereas Probst et al.
(2020) reported the opposite effect (at least among some landholders) of a recent titling program
in Brazil. In their synthesis of 117 studies of interventions that strengthened land tenure security,
Tseng et al. (2021) found that the majority reported positive impacts on environmental outcomes.8
Note that most of these studies examined programs that strengthened individuals’ property rights
over land that de facto was already held privately. An exception is provided by BenYishay et al.
(2017b), who studied a large program in Brazil to formalize indigenous communities’ land rights
and concluded that it had no impact on deforestation. Whether land and other natural resources
should be owned privately or communally and how best to manage communal resources are also
important questions, which have been discussed by Ostrom (1990), among others.

5.2. Regulatory Capacity
Regulation is a powerful means of protecting the environment. For example, the steep decline in
manufacturing pollution in the United States between 1990 and 2008 appears to have been almost
entirely due to the 1990 Clean Air Act amendments (Shapiro & Walker 2018).
Unfortunately, regulation is often less effective in limiting environmental degradation in developing countries. Regulations tend to be less stringent or less strictly enforced due both to the

8A

systematic review of the effects of tenure formalization on economic, as opposed to environmental, outcomes concluded that there is stronger evidence that such interventions improve agricultural productivity and
consumption in Latin America and Asia than in Africa, perhaps because customary land rights are quite strong
to begin with in much of Africa (Lawry et al. 2017).
www.annualreviews.org

•

How Economic Development Influences the Environment

243

insufficient resources available for monitoring and enforcement activities and to the prevalence
of corruption.9 Improving governments’ capacity to regulate is one of the few surefire ways to
protect the environment.

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

5.2.1. Resources for regulatory enforcement. A recent success story for environmental regulation is Brazil’s stronger protection of the Amazon that began in the mid-2000s. Brazil increased
penalties for illegal deforestation and dedicated more resources to enforcement. Burgess et al.
(2019) examined forest cover near Brazil’s border, comparing it with its neighbors to the north
and west. Brazil initially had a deforestation rate that was 37% higher than its neighbors, but
within a year or so of stepping up its regulatory efforts, it was able to bridge the gap. Assunção
et al. (2019) showed that Brazil’s success in protecting the Amazon was made possible by the use
of satellite imagery by regulators to detect deforestation almost in real time. The study used variation in whether cloud cover obscured officials’ ability to monitor deforestation in an area and
showed that when clear satellite images were available, that area experienced less deforestation.
Unfortunately, Burgess et al. (2019) also showed that Brazil’s progress reversed when the political
and economic climate changed in 2014.
The importance of allocating enough resources to monitor compliance with environmental
regulations was also demonstrated in an experiment in Gujarat, India, in which some industrial
plants were randomly assigned to receive more inspections (Duflo et al. 2018). The increased
frequency of inspections seems to have decreased the likelihood that a plant’s emissions would be
noncompliant with regulations.
When a government has insufficient resources for monitoring, it is easier for people to pollute
while evading detection. For example, because governments can only measure river pollution near
monitoring stations—and specifically, only the pollution generated upstream of them—people
can strategically locate downstream of them. He et al. (2020) compared chemical oxygen demand
emissions just upstream and downstream of monitoring stations. With this RD design, they estimated that the pollution level was half as high upstream, presumably because local officials had
the information and incentive to crack down on polluting activity in this area.
Another challenge is that pollution in one jurisdiction can spread to other jurisdictions, which
weakens the incentive of governments to robustly regulate pollution. For example, local officials
might be laxer about curtailing river pollution just upstream of their border because it will soon
leave their jurisdiction. Lipscomb & Mobarak (2016) showed evidence of such behavior in Brazil.
Greater oversight of local regulators by a central government—which has an incentive to internalize cross-jurisdiction externalities—could help solve this problem. Kahn et al. (2015) studied the
Chinese government’s efforts to do just that. In 2006, the government announced that provincial
officials who did not attain specific targets by 2010 would be punished. The government was aware
that many provinces concentrate pollution near borders to “export” it, so it designed provincespecific targets with this behavior in mind. Based on a DiD design, the study found that the policy
was effective in lowering pollution levels that had been concentrated just upstream of borders.
5.2.2. Corruption. Even if a government nominally has strong regulations in place and allocates
enough resources to enforce them, corruption can undermine their effectiveness. For example,
Mexico City introduced compulsory semiannual smog checks for vehicles in 1990 in an effort to
reduce air pollution. To prevent misreporting, they created an electronic system through which
tests results were automatically uploaded to the environment ministry. Nonetheless, Oliva (2015)
9 Limited regulation is also due to societal preferences. As discussed earlier, people’s willingness to sacrifice
some of their income to protect the environment increases as their income grows.

244

Jayachandran

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

detected widespread corruption in smog check certification. If a customer’s car was noncompliant
and they were willing to pay a bribe, a smog check center would use another customer’s car in lieu
of the bribe payer’s car. The statistical signature of this form of cheating is that two consecutive
pollution readings will be excessively similar; that is, there will be serial correlation in the pollution
readings. When Oliva (2015) implemented this statistical test, she rejected the null hypothesis of
no cheating in over three-fourths of smog check centers.
In many settings, third-party auditors, such as operators of smog check centers, certify compliance with government regulations. If people are permitted to choose their own auditors, this
makes it easier for them to seek out known corrupt auditors. Even without outright bribes, auditors have an incentive to provide results that please their customers to get repeat business and
word-of-mouth referrals. The RCT among industrial plants in Gujarat, India, described above
also randomly varied whether the plants could choose their own pollution inspectors (the status
quo) or were assigned a randomly chosen auditor (the treatment group) (Duflo et al. 2013). As
part of the treatment, the government put in place a system to audit the auditors: The inspectors
were aware that 20% of their readings would be verified and that their pay would be tied to the
accuracy of their readings. Under the status quo, about 56% of plants were compliant with pollution regulations, but in an additional 29% of cases, the third-party auditor falsely reported that
the plant was compliant. The intervention reduced this rate of false reporting by 80%.
Burgess et al. (2012) presented evidence consistent with the proposition that bribery is one
of the key factors that enable illegal logging in Indonesia. The study tested the hypothesis that,
if bribery is occurring, then political competition across jurisdictions will lead to more illegal
logging. In essence, the supply of officials willing to sell a logger the right to illegally harvest
timber will be larger. An increase in competition is similar to an outward shift in a supply curve in
that the market-clearing price—or bribe level, in this case—falls, and more transactions take place.
The study tested and confirmed this hypothesis by using a wave of decentralization in the 2000s,
which created smaller and more numerous jurisdictions, as the source of variation in competition.
There is also evidence of the environmental costs of corruption beyond the realm of regulatory
enforcement. Mahadevan (2020) used an RD design based on close elections of local legislators in
West Bengal, India, to show that when the winner’s party was in power at the state level, the legislator used their additional political power to provide subsidized electricity to their constituents,
which, in turn, caused their constituents to use more electricity.

5.3. Trade Openness
As explained by Grossman & Krueger (1991), there are three ways by which international trade
could influence environmental quality. The first is a scale effect: When there is more production,
it harms the environment. The second is a composition effect: The mix of goods changes, in ways
that could be more or less damaging to the environment. Third, international trade can lead to the
adoption of cleaner technologies, which is referred to as the technique effect. The technique effect
occurs because trade encourages technology transfer; it can entail new, stricter regulatory standards; and it can increase the demand for environmental protection if people become better-off
financially. Recent reviews by Cherniwchan et al. (2017) and Copeland et al. (2021) have discussed
international trade and the environment in detail. Here I will limit my discussion to a few recent
studies that used causal research designs to disentangle the different forces.
The simplest way that trade openness can hurt the environment is if it increases the scale of
production in existing resource-depleting or high-pollution industries. Eisenbarth (2022) provides
evidence of such an effect for fisheries. She used the collapse of fisheries in Japan in the 1980s and
1990s as an instrument for the export demand enjoyed by fisheries in other countries. (Collapse
www.annualreviews.org

•

How Economic Development Influences the Environment

245

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

refers to a very large reduction in the stock of fish.) She found that increases in overseas demand
for fish caused fisheries to expand production, which increased the likelihood of collapse.
Besides increasing market size, trade also allows different countries or subnational regions to
specialize in industries in which they have a comparative advantage. How they specialize depends
partly on their factor endowments. Richer countries might concentrate on industries that use
more high-skill labor (or, more precisely, highly educated labor), such as those in the service sector.
Meanwhile, poorer countries might specialize in heavy manufacturing and primary industries that
generate more pollution. A different reason poorer countries might specialize in dirty industries
is that their environmental rules are laxer.
Tanaka et al. (2021) studied this “pollution haven” hypothesis by examining the relocation of
lead-acid battery recycling to Mexico in response to the imposition of more stringent air quality
standards in the US. They first showed that the upward trend in US exports of used lead-acid batteries to Mexico became steeper in 2009, when the policy change occurred. They then conducted
a DiD analysis that compared mothers living near and far from battery-recycling plants in Mexico
before and after the US regulatory change. Because they could not directly study lead pollution
due to a lack of data, they used poor birth outcomes—a known consequence of exposure to lead
pollution—as a proxy (and important outcome per se). The authors found a 39% increase in low
birthweight incidence among mothers living near battery-recycling plants.
Davis & Kahn (2010) also studied the pollution haven hypothesis in the context of US–Mexico
trade but focused on consumption rather than production. The authors leveraged the deregulation of US–Mexico trade in used cars and trucks following NAFTA. As part of NAFTA, in
2005 Mexico began allowing the import of 10–15-year-old vehicles from the United States and
Canada. Using data on vehicles that were tested under California’s smog check program, the authors showed that vehicles that were exported to Mexico were more likely than average to have
failed emissions testing. They then looked at the effects of the increased trade on the vehicles in
circulation in the United States and Mexico. The number of vehicles in the United States did not
change significantly after 2005, suggesting that most of the vehicles exported to Mexico would
have been scrapped otherwise. Within Mexico, the additional cars did not replace existing ones
but instead increased the total number of cars, shifting the composition toward an older fleet. The
study estimated that, due to trade, annual CO2 emissions increased by 5.6 million tons annually.
Another type of study on international trade and the environment estimates the effects of foreign demand shocks on firms’ pollution levels. Often, a shift-share instrument is used to generate
variation in foreign demand.10 Barrows & Ollivier (2021) used this approach to study the link between foreign demand and CO2 emissions among Indian manufacturing firms between 1995 and
2011. They constructed product-specific demand shocks for each firm by combining importing
country–specific changes in demand for the product and the initial destination mix for the firm’s
exports of the product. They found that positive shocks to demand lowered pollution intensity
(CO2 emissions relative to output) but increased overall CO2 emissions. The first result is consistent with a salutary technique effect, whereas the second result implies that the technique effect
is dominated by the opposite-signed scale effect. (Because this exercise held the product fixed, the
composition effect was shut down.)
Bombardini & Li (2020) considered another mechanism through which demand shocks affect pollution, one related to local purchasing power. A positive shock to foreign demand
will raise wages and profits, and this increase in local purchasing power could lead to higher
10 With a shift-share instrument, the demand shock experienced by a firm is constructed by combining changes
in the aggregate quantity purchased by different buyers (the shift) and the proportion of the firm’s sales to each
of those buyers at the outset of the study period (the share).

246

Jayachandran

consumption and different forms of consumption that harm the environment. The authors disentangled this consumer-side effect from producer-side effects by constructing two shift-share
instruments, one that took into consideration the pollution intensity of the industry experiencing
the demand shock and one that was general. They implemented their strategy using data from
Chinese firms and found that the increased pollution that resulted from higher foreign demand
could be fully explained by producer-side effects. The increase in people’s incomes had, if anything,
a dampening effect on pollution in this context.

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

5.4. Market Competition
Market competition often increases with development, both because trade openness creates import competition and because of other policy reforms. Increases in competition can have environmental consequences. A profit-minded manufacturer might upgrade to more energy-efficient
machinery to cut its energy costs, and this behavior will create environmental benefits. Whereas
all firms have an incentive to take advantage of these cost-saving opportunities, firms that do not
face much competition are often not run as efficiently. Competition puts pressure on inefficient
firms to cut costs to match competitors’ lower prices, which can help improve the environment if
it leads to energy conservation. Gutiérrez & Teshima (2018) tested this idea using tariff reductions
that occurred in Mexico between 2000 and 2003. Due to the lower tariffs, Mexican firms selling
to the domestic market faced more import competition. The authors used industry-specific tariff
changes to calculate the tariff change applicable to each manufacturing plant in their sample. They
found that lower tariffs—that is, increased competition—increased energy efficiency, measured as
the firm’s fuel and electricity expenditures divided by its total revenue. The study also presented
some suggestive evidence that lower tariffs led to a reduction in air pollution in the vicinity of the
plant.
Another effect of competition is that it can drive less productive firms out of the market. This
phenomenon could have environmental implications if these firms are especially low- or highpolluting. To analyze this phenomenon, Qi et al. (2021) studied firms in heavily polluting industries in China. A relevant fact about the context is that larger firms tend to be more productive.
One of their findings was that larger firms have, on average, lower intensity of water pollution,
that is, pollution relative to output. This pattern is consistent with another finding: Larger firms
are more likely to use an advanced abatement technology that reduces pollution but has high
installation costs. Their study focused not on competition but on misallocation, or how policy
distortions and factor market imperfections affect which firms exist and how large they are (Hsieh
& Klenow 2009). Like competition, misallocation can enable inefficient firms to survive. Qi et al.
(2021) found that fewer large, low-polluting firms exist in China than would exist in the absence
of misallocation, and if this problem were eliminated, pollution intensity would decline by over
one-third. Moreover, even though the scale of production would increase in this scenario, the
gains from reallocation across firms would more than offset the scale effect, so aggregate pollution would decrease as well.

6. CONCLUSION
Over the past two decades, economists have increasingly used randomized experiments, regression discontinuity designs, and other quasi-experimental methods to study causal questions.
Research at the intersection of development economics and environmental economics is no
exception. In tandem, new and better data sources to measure environmental outcomes (for
example, from satellite imagery and pollution monitors) have become available. These trends,
combined with greater awareness about climate change and other environmental crises, have
www.annualreviews.org

•

How Economic Development Influences the Environment

247

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

led to a flourishing of research that examines how different aspects of economic development
influence the environment. This article synthesizes recent work in this area.
While we should not expect a tidy, universal answer to the question of whether economic
progress helps or hurts the environment, this article identifies a few key patterns. One conclusion I draw is that better regulation is a reliable path through which economic development will
bring about stronger environmental protection. Most behaviors that harm the environment impose a negative externality on others, so we should not expect individual unregulated behavior
to lead to a socially desirable level of environmental protection. Hence, environmental regulation is crucial. Economic development increases both the supply of and demand for regulation.
In the first mechanism, the government’s capacity to create and enforce regulation improves. In
the second, as citizens become richer, they are more likely to prioritize a healthy environment.
Another predictable pattern is that economic advances that expand consumption and production
generally harm the environment, as the increased scale of activity depletes resources and creates
pollution. However, we cannot use this assumption to generalize the total effect of pushing out
the production possibilities frontier, which is more complex than the scaling up of current activity.
The specifics of the new possibilities and how they compare to the status quo matter. This is true
whether new economic possibilities are opened up by financial market development, technology,
trade, or infrastructure.
The synthesis also reveals several areas where more work would be valuable. I will list four.
The first concerns what policies, technologies, and institutional reforms will enable governments
to regulate more effectively. A second avenue for research is to better understand the mechanisms by which development causes people to value environmental protection more. We know
little about the relative importance of pure gains in purchasing power versus having a citizenry
more informed about environmental harms, for example. A third open question relates to how a
community’s degree of market integration influences the effect of economic productivity on the
environment. Most of the existing evidence focuses on local environmental outcomes, but a critical unanswered question is how aggregate outcomes change when trade enables the geographic
separation of production and consumption. A fourth and very broad question is how public policy
can direct economic growth to be more pro-environment. Although we sometimes get lucky and
an economic improvement helps the environment, often it does not. However, public policy can
intervene to try to direct economic growth in a greener direction. One tool is industrial policy.
For example, Garg & Shenoy (2021) studied a government policy in India that used tax breaks
to attract new, environmentally friendly industries. The policy spurred economic growth without
measurable ecological damage. Another policy approach would be to incentive pro-environment
technological innovations, such as cleaner production techniques or mechanical harvesters that
do not leave behind stubble.
It would be naive to expect that industrial policy or new innovations will fully eliminate the
trade-off between economic development and environmental protection. The world faces a climate crisis and other pressing environmental problems, and, at the same time, more than 60% of
the global population has a purchasing power of less than $10 a day (Roser 2021). Understanding the tensions involved in simultaneously solving both problems and the ways in which their
solutions are aligned is of vital importance and will hopefully remain a vibrant area of research in
economics.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might
be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
248

Jayachandran

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Katie Daehler, Marie Decamps, Jake Gosselin, Caitlin Rowe, and Lauriane Yehouenou for
excellent research assistance and Jonathan Colmer, Jeff Dickinson, Rebecca Dizon-Ross, Teevrat
Garg, Kelsey Jack, and an anonymous reviewer for comments on an earlier draft.

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

LITERATURE CITED
Abman R, Garg T, Pan Y, Singhal S. 2020. Agriculture and deforestation. Work. Pap., San Diego State Univ.,
San Diego, CA
Acemoglu D, Johnson S, Robinson JA. 2005. Institutions as a fundamental cause of long-run growth. In Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1, ed. P Aghion, S Durlauf, pp. 385–472. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Ali DA, Deininger K, Goldstein M. 2014. Environmental and gender impacts of land tenure regularization in
Africa: pilot evidence from Rwanda. J. Dev. Econ. 110:262–75
Alix-Garcia J, McIntosh C, Sims KR, Welch JR. 2013. The ecological footprint of poverty alleviation: evidence
from Mexico’s Oportunidades program. Rev. Econ. Stat. 95(2):417–35
Andersen DC. 2016. Credit constraints, technology upgrading, and the environment. J. Assoc. Environ. Resour.
Econ. 3(2):283–319
Andersen DC. 2017. Do credit constraints favor dirty production? Theory and plant-level evidence. J. Environ.
Econ. Manag. 84:189–208
Asher S, Garg T, Novosad P. 2020. The ecological impact of transportation infrastructure. Econ. J.
130(629):1173–99
Ashraf N, Berry J, Shapiro JM. 2010. Can higher prices stimulate product use? Evidence from a field experiment in Zambia. Am. Econ. Rev. 100(5):2383–413
Assunção J, Gandoura C, Rocha R. 2019. DETERring deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon: environmental monitoring and law enforcement. Work. Pap., Pontif. Cathol. Univ. Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Assunção J, Gandour C, Rocha R, Rocha R. 2020. The effect of rural credit on deforestation: evidence from
the Brazilian Amazon. Econ. J. 130(626):290–330
Banerjee A, Duflo E, Goldberg N, Karlan D, Osei R, et al. 2015. A multifaceted program causes lasting progress
for the very poor: evidence from six countries. Science 348(6236):1260799
Barrows G, Ollivier H. 2021. Foreign demand, developing country exports, and CO2 emissions: firm-level
evidence from India. J. Dev. Econ. 149:102587
Barwick PJ, Li S, Lin L, Zou E. 2020. From fog to smog: the value of pollution information. NBER Work. Pap.
26541
Baylis P, Greenstone M, Lee K, Sahai H. 2021. Pollution masks and the demand for clean air: experimental evidence
from Delhi. Work. Pap., Univ. Chicago, Chicago
Behrer AP. 2019. Earth, wind and fire: the impact of anti-poverty efforts on Indian agriculture and air pollution. Work.
Pap., Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA
BenYishay A, Fraker A, Guiteras R, Palloni G, Shah NB, et al. 2017a. Microcredit and willingness to pay for
environmental quality: evidence from a randomized-controlled trial of finance for sanitation in rural
Cambodia. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 86:121–40
BenYishay A, Heuser S, Runfola D, Trichler R. 2017b. Indigenous land rights and deforestation: evidence
from the Brazilian Amazon. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 86:29–47
Berkouwer SB, Dean JT. 2021. Credit, attention, and externalities in the adoption of energy efficient technologies by
low-income households. Work. Pap., Univ. Pa., Philadelphia
Berry J, Fischer G, Guiteras R. 2020. Eliciting and utilizing willingness to pay: evidence from field trials in
Northern Ghana. J. Political Econ. 128(4):1436–73
Besley T. 1995. Property rights and investment incentives: theory and evidence from Ghana. J. Political Econ.
103(5):903–37
Besley T, Ghatak M. 2010. Property rights and economic development. In Handbook of Development Economics,
Vol. 5, ed. D Rodrik, M Rosenzweig, pp. 4525–95. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Besley T, Persson T. 2009. The origins of state capacity: property rights, taxation, and politics. Am. Econ. Rev.
99(4):1218–44
www.annualreviews.org

•

How Economic Development Influences the Environment

249

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

Blackman A, Corral L, Lima ES, Asner GP. 2017. Titling indigenous communities protects forests in the
Peruvian Amazon. PNAS 114(16):4123–28
Bombardini M, Li B. 2020. Trade, pollution and mortality in China. J. Int. Econ. 125:103321
Borlaug N. 2007. Feeding a hungry world. Science 318(5849):359
Brainerd E, Menon N. 2014. Seasonal effects of water quality: the hidden costs of the Green Revolution to
infant and child health in India. J. Dev. Econ. 107:49–64
Burgess R, Costa F, Olken BA. 2019. The Brazilian Amazon’s double reversal of fortune. Work. Pap., Mass. Inst.
Technol., Cambridge
Burgess R, Hansen M, Olken BA, Potapov P, Sieber S. 2012. The political economy of deforestation in the
tropics. Q. J. Econ. 127(4):1707–54
Cherniwchan J, Copeland BR, Taylor MS. 2017. Trade and the environment: new methods, measurements,
and results. Annu. Rev. Econ. 9:59–85
Copeland BR, Shapiro JS, Taylor MS. 2021. Globalization and the environment. NBER Work. Pap. 28797
Dasgupta P. 1996. The economics of the environment. Environ. Dev. Econ. 1(4):387–428
Dasgupta P, Mäler KG. 1995. Poverty, institutions, and the environmental resource-base. In Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 3A, ed. J Behrman, TN Srinivasan, pp. 2371–463. Amsterdam: North-Holland
Davis LW, Kahn ME. 2010. International trade in used vehicles: the environmental consequences of NAFTA.
Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 2(4):58–82
Duflo E, Greenstone M, Pande R, Ryan N. 2013. Truth-telling by third-party auditors and the response of
polluting firms: experimental evidence from India. Q. J. Econ. 128(4):1499–545
Duflo E, Greenstone M, Pande R, Ryan N. 2018. The value of regulatory discretion: estimates from environmental inspections in India. Econometrica 86(6):2123–60
Eisenbarth S. 2022. Do exports of renewable resources lead to resource depletion? Evidence from fisheries.
J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 112:102603
Feng W, Cai B, Zhang B. 2020. A bite of China: food consumption and carbon emission from 1992 to 2007.
China Econ. Rev. 59:100949
Ferraro PJ, Simorangkir R. 2020. Conditional cash transfers to alleviate poverty also reduced deforestation in
Indonesia. Sci. Adv. 6(24):eaaz1298
Franzen A, Vogl D. 2013. Two decades of measuring environmental attitudes: a comparative analysis of 33
countries. Global Environ. Change 23(5):1001–8
Garcia A. 2020. The environmental impacts of agricultural intensification. Tech. Rep. 9, CGIAR Standing Panel
Impact Assess., CGIAR, Rome, Italy
Garg T, Jagnani M, Pullabhotla HK. 2020. Agricultural labor exits increase crop fires. Work. Pap., Univ. Calif.,
San Diego
Garg T, Shenoy A. 2021. The ecological impact of place-based economic policies. Am. J. Agric. Econ.
103(4):1239–50
Gendron-Carrier N, Gonzalez-Navarro M, Polloni S, Turner MA. 2022. Subways and urban air pollution.
Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 14(1):164–96
Gertler PJ, Shelef O, Wolfram CD, Fuchs A. 2016. The demand for energy-using assets among the world’s
rising middle classes. Am. Econ. Rev. 106(6):1366–401
Ghani E, Goswami AG, Kerr WR. 2016. Highway to success: the impact of the Golden Quadrilateral Project
for the location and performance of Indian manufacturing. Econ. J. 126(591):317–57
Goldstein M, Houngbedji K, Kondylis F, O’Sullivan M, Selod H. 2018. Formalization without certification?
Experimental evidence on property rights and investment. J. Dev. Econ. 132:57–74
Goldstein M, Udry C. 2008. The profits of power: land rights and agricultural investment in Ghana. J. Political
Econ. 116(6):981–1022
Greenstone M, Jack BK. 2015. Envirodevonomics: a research agenda for an emerging field. J. Econ. Lit. 53(1):5–
42
Grossman GM, Krueger AB. 1991. Environmental impacts of a North American Free Trade Agreement. NBER
Work. Pap. 3914
Grossman GM, Krueger AB. 1995. Economic growth and the environment. Q. J. Econ. 110(2):353–77
Gutiérrez E, Teshima K. 2018. Abatement expenditures, technology choice, and environmental performance:
evidence from firm responses to import competition in Mexico. J. Dev. Econ. 133:264–74
250

Jayachandran

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

Hanna R, Oliva P. 2015. Moving up the energy ladder: the effect of an increase in economic well-being on the
fuel consumption choices of the poor in India. Am. Econ. Rev. 105(5):242–46
Haushofer J, Shapiro J. 2016. The short-term impact of unconditional cash transfers to the poor: experimental
evidence from Kenya. Q. J. Econ. 131(4):1973–2042
He G, Wang S, Zhang B. 2020. Watering down environmental regulation in China. Q. J. Econ. 135(4):2135–85
He P, Baiocchi G, Feng K, Hubacek K, Yu Y. 2019. Environmental impacts of dietary quality improvement in
China. J. Environ. Manag. 240:518–26
Health Eff. Inst. 2020. Average seasonal population-weighted ozone. State of Global Air 2020. https://www.
stateofglobalair.org/data/#/air/table
Hess S, Jaimovich D, Schündeln M. 2021. Environmental effects of development programs: experimental
evidence from West African dryland forests. J. Dev. Econ. 153:102737
Hsieh CT, Klenow PJ. 2009. Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India. Q. J. Econ.
124(4):1403–48
Ito K, Zhang S. 2020a. Reforming inefficient energy pricing: evidence from China. NBER Work. Pap. 26853
Ito K, Zhang S. 2020b. Willingness to pay for clean air: evidence from air purifier markets in China. J. Political
Econ. 128(5):1627–72
Jaffe AB, Stavins RN. 1994. The energy paradox and the diffusion of conservation technology. Resour. Energy
Econ. 16(2):91–122
Jayachandran S. 2013. Liquidity constraints and deforestation: the limitations of payments for ecosystem services. Am. Econ. Rev. 103(3):309–13
Kahn ME, Li P, Zhao D. 2015. Water pollution progress at borders: the role of changes in China’s political
promotion incentives. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 7(4):223–42
Lawlor K, Handa S, Davis B, Seidenfeld D, et al. 2020. Poverty-environment relationships under market
heterogeneity: cash transfers and rural livelihoods in Zambia. Environ. Dev. Econ. 25(3):291–314
Lawry S, Samii C, Hall R, Leopold A, Hornby D, Mtero F. 2017. The impact of land property rights interventions on investment and agricultural productivity in developing countries: a systematic review. J. Dev.
Eff. 9(1):61–81
Levine DI, Beltramo T, Blalock G, Cotterman C, Simons AM. 2018. What impedes efficient adoption of
products? Evidence from randomized sales offers for fuel-efficient cookstoves in Uganda. J. Eur. Econ.
Assoc. 16(6):1850–80
Levine R. 1997. Financial development and economic growth: views and agenda. J. Econ. Lit. 35(2):688–726
Li S, Liu Y, Purevjav AO, Yang L. 2019. Does subway expansion improve air quality? J. Environ. Econ. Manag.
96:213–35
Lipscomb M, Mobarak AM. 2016. Decentralization and pollution spillovers: evidence from the re-drawing of
county borders in Brazil. Rev. Econ. Stud. 84(1):464–502
López-Feldman A, Chávez E. 2017. Remittances and natural resource extraction: evidence from Mexico. Ecol.
Econ. 132:69–79
Mahadevan M. 2020. The price of power: costs of political corruption in Indian electricity. Work. Pap., Univ. Calif.,
Irvine
Malerba D. 2020. Poverty alleviation and local environmental degradation: an empirical analysis in Colombia.
World Dev. 127:104776
Meeks R, Isaev R, Omuraliev A, Wang Z. 2021. Smart meters and the benefits from electricity quality improvements.
Work. Pap., Duke Univ., Durham, NC
Meeks R, Sims KR, Thompson H. 2019. Waste not: Can household biogas deliver sustainable development?
Environ. Resour. Econ. 72(3):763–94
Nagaraj A. 2022. The private impact of public data: Landsat satellite maps increased gold discoveries and
encouraged entry. Manag. Sci. 68(1):564–82
NationMaster. 2014. Motor vehicles per 1000 people. NationMaster. https://www.nationmaster.com/countryinfo/stats/Transport/Road/Motor-vehicles-per-1000-people
Nriagu JO. 1990. The rise and fall of leaded gasoline. Sci. Total Environ. 92:13–28
Oliva P. 2015. Environmental regulations and corruption: automobile emissions in Mexico City. J. Political
Econ. 123(3):686–724
www.annualreviews.org

•

How Economic Development Influences the Environment

251

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2022.14:229-252. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Princeton University Library on 08/17/22. For personal use only.

Oliva P, Jack BK, Bell S, Mettetal E, Severen C. 2020. Technology adoption under uncertainty: take-up and
subsequent investment in Zambia. Rev. Econ. Stat. 102(3):617–32
Ostrom E. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge Univ. Press
Pagel J. 2020. Aid against trees? Evidence from a community-driven development program in the Philippines. Work.
Pap., Univ. Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Probst B, BenYishay A, Kontoleon A, dos Reis TN. 2020. Impacts of a large-scale titling initiative on deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon. Nat. Sustain. 3(12):1019–26
Qi J, Tang X, Xi X. 2021. The size distribution of firms and industrial water pollution: a quantitative analysis
of China. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 13(1):151–83
Roser M. 2021. Global poverty in an unequal world: Who is considered poor in a rich country? And what does
this mean for our understanding of global poverty? Our World in Data, March 5. https://ourworldindata.
org/higher-poverty-global-line
Ryan N. 2018. Energy productivity and energy demand: experimental evidence from Indian manufacturing plants.
NBER Work. Pap. 24619
Ryan N, Sudarshan A. 2020. Rationing the commons. Work. Pap., Yale Univ., New Haven, CT
Sekhri S. 2011. Public provision and protection of natural resources: groundwater irrigation in rural India.
Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 3(4):29–55
Shapiro JS, Walker R. 2018. Why is pollution from US manufacturing declining? The roles of environmental
regulation, productivity, and trade. Am. Econ. Rev. 108(12):3814–54
Stern DI. 2017. The environmental Kuznets curve after 25 years. J. Bioecon. 19(1):7–28
Stevenson JR, Villoria N, Byerlee D, Kelley T, Maredia M. 2013. Green Revolution research saved an estimated 18 to 27 million hectares from being brought into agricultural production. PNAS 110(21):8363–68
Tanaka S, Teshima K, Verhoogen E. 2021. North-South displacement effects of environmental regulation: the
case of battery recycling. Am. Econ. Rev. Insights. In press
Tseng TWJ, Robinson BE, Bellemare MF, BenYishay A, Blackman A, et al. 2021. Influence of land tenure
interventions on human well-being and environmental outcomes. Nat. Sustain. 4(3):242–51
van Benthem AA. 2015. Energy leapfrogging. J. Assoc. Environ. Resour. Econ. 2(1):93–132
WHO (World Health Organ.). 2016. SDG Indicator 11.6.2. Concentrations of fine particulate matter (PM2.5).
The Global Health Observatory. https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/indicators/indicator-details/
GHO/concentrations-of-fine-particulate-matter-(pm2-5)
Wilebore B, Voors M, Bulte EH, Coomes D, Kontoleon A. 2019. Unconditional transfers and tropical forest
conservation: evidence from a randomized control trial in Sierra Leone. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 101(3):894–
918
Worku IH, Dereje M, Minten B, Hirvonen K. 2017. Diet transformation in Africa: the case of Ethiopia. Agric.
Econ. 48(S1):73–86
World Bank. 2018. Co2 emissions (metric tons per capita). The World Bank. https://data.worldbank.org/
indicator/EN.ATM.CO2E.PC
World Bank. 2020. Gdp per capita, ppp (current international $). The World Bank. https://data.worldbank.org/
indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD
Wren-Lewis L, Becerra-Valbuena L, Houngbedji K. 2020. Formalizing land rights can reduce forest loss:
experimental evidence from Benin. Sci. Adv. 6(26):eabb6914

252

Jayachandran


